A 
 AFFECTIVE TURN

Can there be aﬀ ect without the human? To 
address this ques tion in the spirit of a gloss-
ary, let’s take these two keywords –  aﬀ ect 
and  posthu man – at face value. A paradox 
would seem impli cit in the pairing. 
Admittedly, there is no consensus on the 
meaning of aﬀ ect, even from within a single 
discip lin ary form a tion, whether it be philo-
sophy, cultural theory or psycho ana lysis. We 
can, however, distin guish those theor ists 
who make distinc tions between this concept 
and possible cognates – emotions, feel ings, 
moods, senti ments, etc. – from those who 
do not. Sianne Ngai’s  Ugly Feelings , a study 
that drew a long arc of the aﬀ ect ive turn in 
the early 2000s, exem pli ﬁ es the refusal to 
distin guish. ‘Feelings,’ ‘emotions’ and ‘aﬀ ects’ 
ﬂ ow inter change ably within Ngai’s work, a 
concep tual choice she addresses head- on: 
‘Th e diﬀ er ence between aﬀ ect and emotion 
is taken as a modal diﬀ er ence of intens ity or 
degree, rather than a formal diﬀ er ence of 
quality or kind’ (2005: 27). Emotions 
become – or ‘dena ture into’ (27) – aﬀ ects 
based on the degree to which they are artic-
ul able and narrat able. Th e continu ity 
between these terms suggests, at minimum, 
that aﬀ ect and emotion both revolve around 
a human perceiver and feeler. Th is human 
orient a tion is vital to the polit ical force 
Ngai’s theory carries.  Ugly Feelings rests on a 
histor ical argu ment, that late capit al ism has 
deformed the polit ical such that we must 
reckon with ‘less power ful’ – oft en ‘ugly’ – 
aﬀ ects such as anxiety and irrit a tion because 
these are the feel ings that are ‘perhaps more 
suited in their ambient, Bartlebyan, but still 
diagnostic nature, for models of subjectiv ity, 
collectiv ity, and agency not entirely fore seen 
by past theor ists’ (5). Ngai’s account of aﬀ ect 
and those it has inspired does not exfo li ate 
the agen tial human subject, even if states 
such as anxiety do, for a time, ‘suspend’ 
agency (1). 
 Perhaps those who more strictly delin-
eate aﬀ ect from its cognates decouple 
human ity from aﬀ ectiv ity more decis ively. 
Brian Massumi’s deﬁ n i tions of aﬀ ect and 
emotion have been germinal for aﬀ ect 
theory and would seem,  prima facie , to 
swerve from human ism into posthu man-
ism.  Parables for the Virtual and Massumi’s 
writ ings leading up to it estab lish ‘the 
autonomy of aﬀ ect’ (2002: 23). ‘An emotion 
is a subject ive content,’ he proposes, ‘the 
soci o lin guistic ﬁ xing of the quality of an 
exper i ence which is from that point onward 
deﬁ ned as personal . . . It is intens ity owned 
and recog nized’ (28). Aﬀ ect, by contrast, is 
‘unqual i ﬁ ed. As such, it is not ownable or 
recog niz able and is thus resist ant to critique’ 
(28). If aﬀ ect is not ‘owned’, perhaps it ﬂ oats 
free of a human possessor. But reading on, 
we learn that, though aﬀ ects are not recog-
nized cognit ively, they are still ‘irre du cibly 
bodily and auto nomic’ (28). Th e pre- or sub- 
personal quality of aﬀ ects does not, for that, 
make them posthu man.  1  
 When we consider not only how such 
germinal studies deﬁ ne aﬀ ect but also the 
style of many aﬀ ect studies, the human 
intrudes even more force fully. Th inkers
typic ally ﬁ nds in aﬀ ect theor ies that 
treat the stuﬀ  of the world – typic ally art 
objects and other people – as cata lysts for 
emotion. 
 How might aﬀ ect be a litmus test for 
inter spe cies – and even inter- matter – ani-
ma tion? In my study of contem por ary 
narrat ives of envir on mental and somatic 
sick ness, aﬀ ects like disgust that might seem 
infe li cit ous 
for 
feeling 
transcor por eal 
connec ted ness in fact make these ﬂ ows 
know able, if not predict able ( Houser 2014 ). 
For Matthew Taylor, the ‘ecopho bia’ that 
laces Edgar Allan Poe’s writing nour ishes an 
‘ecolo gical posthu man ism’ rather than 
human superi or ity and mastery (2013: 359). 
Aﬀ ectivity does not mark human unique-
ness. Th e world does not give us the choice 
of separ a tion and superi or ity, ecolo gical 
posthu man ists instruct. Care might not be 
the stance or ethic that results from the 
aﬀ ect ive messi ness through which beings 
exper i ence ‘the inex tric ab il ity of depend-
ency, the ines cap ab il ity of vulner ab il ity, the 
impossib il ity of mastery’ ( Taylor 2013 : 370). 
Whether through fear, disgust, anxiety or 
wonder, real iz ing vulner ab il ity is rarely an 
easy matter; it is just as prone to set more 
troub ling emotions into motion as it is to 
create comfort able rela tions. For the envir-
on mental human it ies, the aﬀ ect ive turn of 
the 2000s may not have made it any easier to 
be good toward (I use this phrase with all 
delib er ate naiveté) other ‘vital it ies’ ( Bennett 
2010 : xvii). It has, however, oﬀ ered ways of 
describ ing how feel ings seem ingly contained 
by the human show the errors in the very 
idea of contain ment. 
 See 
also 
Ecohorror; 
Ecomaterialism; 
Green/Environmental 
Humanities; 
Multispecies; Political Aﬀ ect; Precognition; 
Trans- corpor eal ity; Vibrant Matter.  
forming the ‘Public Feelings’ group – 
notably Lauren Berlant ( Cruel Optimism ), 
Ann Cvetkovich ( Depression ), José Esteban 
Muñoz ( Cruising Utopia ) and Kathleen 
Stewart ( Ordinary Aﬀ ects  ) – write from the 
embod ied ‘I,’ at times in an avowedly 
memoir istic mode. Th ese and gener ic ally 
similar 
studies 
substan ti ate 
Eugenie 
Brinkema’s point that the aﬀ ect ive turn 
has ‘a perform at ive dimen sion . . . that 
emphas izes the personal exper i ence of the 
theor ist’ and thus ‘preserve[s] a kernel of 
human ism’ at the core of its endeav our 
(2014: 31, 32). 
 Th e human, then, contam in ates aﬀ ect 
studies; across the diﬀ er ences between 
theor ists, this attrib ute makes the enter-
prise cohere. Looking to envir on mental 
cultural studies, aﬀ ect is the fulcrum for 
imagin ing posthu man ism as vulner ab il ity 
rather than as a state of being ‘not’, 
‘beyond’ or ‘aft er’ human ism. Th is strain of 
posthu man ist thought posits a pros thetic 
being deﬁ ned by ‘constitutive depend ency 
and ﬁ nitude’ ( Wolfe 2010 : xxvi) rather 
than a disem bod ied entity 2 or one opti-
mized by biotech no lo gical engin eer ing. 
A struc tur ing prob lem atic of aﬀ ect 
theory – the relays between subject and 
object – is constitutive for think ing post-
human ism from within envir on mental 
thought. In this intel lec tual tradi tion, the 
‘object’ typic ally belongs to the more- 
than-human realm of other animal species, 
plants, elements and forces. 3 Stacy Alaimo 
proposes ‘transcor por eal ity’ to ﬁ gure the 
permeab il ity of the membranes between 
humans and those others with which it is 
enmeshed. In her femin ist mater i al ist 
analysis, 
posthu man ism 
requires 
‘accountab[ility] to a mater ial world that 
is never merely an external place but 
always the very substance of ourselves and 
others’ ( Alaimo 2010 : 158). Th e human 
persists, but she is not alone. Her very 
mater i al ity is made of the stuﬀ  of the