AFROFUTURISM

place a peoples’ history into celeb ra tions of 
future possib il it ies. Esedebe has valid ity 
despite relying on what Gilroy ( 1987 ) calls 
an ‘ethnic abso lut ism’ to reima gine black 
iden tity. Just as Afrofuturism risks being 
reduced to a reﬂ ec tion of the exist ing 
world, reﬂ ec tion is precisely what moves 
Afrofuturism into the contin gen cies of 
other- world ness 
that 
allow 
for 
the 
ether eal to artic u late itself both in seas 
of dark ness and in the bright ness of the 
sun. Still, perhaps neither dicho tomy is 
adequate, as the nuances that comprise 
collect ive belong ing are captured no more 
neatly into ideas of black ness than they are 
suﬃ   cient descrip tions of Afrofuturism – 
even if the resi li ence of black culture and 
black life is about ‘imagin ing the impossible, 
imagin ing a better place, a diﬀ er ent world’. 1 
Aft er all, each Afrofuturist expres sion is 
collect ive only in as much as it can’t be 
repres en ted. 
 Science ﬁ ction writer Samuel R. Delany 
reminds us that 
  one of the most force ful and distin guish-
ing aspects of science ﬁ ction is that it’s 
marginal. It’s always at its most honest 
and most eﬀ ect ive when it oper ates – and 
claims to be oper at ing – from the margins 
. . . I don’t want to see it operate from 
anyone’s center: black nation al ism’s, 
femin ism’s, gay rights’, pro- tech no logy 
move ments’, ecology move ments’, or 
any other center
 Dery 1994 : 189 
 According to Ytasha Womack ( 2013 ), 
Afrofuturism is an appar atus by which a 
non- linear and ﬂ uid imagin ary emerges. 
But how does one remain at the margins 
without recap tur ing new, equally volat ile 
forms 
of 
repres ent a tion? 
All 
this 
considered, Afrofuturism might be best 
illus trated 
by 
the 
impossib il ity 
of 
black ness, the impossib il ity of being 
black, an impossible engage ment with 
( Guattari 1995 : 29–30). It is through the 
meaning of black ness that the black, 
brown and other subjec ted indi vidual 
creates a cohe sion of (mis)repres ent a tion, 
expounded by aesthetic markers, dynamic 
vibra tions and a cultural kinet i cism oft en 
expressed as a sense of belong ing. 
 Nonetheless, Afrofuturism’s fragil ity 
comes from liber a tion- based ideo lo gies 
found in black iden tity polit ics. Here, a 
commit ment to the idea of race and 
ethnic- based cent ral ity is thought essen tial 
to tech niques of survival (see  Bogues 2003 ; 
 Morrison 1992 ;  West 1989 ). Racial iden tity 
then becomes a source of secur ity, as a 
body polit ics nonethe less, that implies 
the stabil ity of black iden tity in denial of 
race as an ever- shift  ing tech no lo gical 
artic u la tion of wider ecolo gical rela tions. 
Critics also argue that Afrocentric logics 
are vulner able to cultural norm ativ it ies 
that extend beyond the repres ent a tional 
and symbolic. Marlon Riggs, Michelle 
Wallace, Angela Davis and bell hooks 
have already illus trated the dangers of 
compos ing a black ness in which queer-
ness, gender open ness, trans lives and 
other non- linear align ments are fore closed 
in eﬀ orts to main tain the rigid it ies of self- 
refer en ti al ity (Riggs 1994). Th is, then, 
raises the follow ing ques tion: if Sun Ra had 
succeeded in taking us to Jupiter or his 
self- proclaimed home planet of Saturn or 
if George Clinton and Parliament had 
been taken up on their invit a tion to ride 
the mother ship, which of us would be left  
behind? 
 Central to this ques tion are reﬂ ec tions 
on the role of history in pre- empting 
the future, and the lens through which 
poten tial futures are performed and 
assessed. Afrofuturism oﬀ ers a breach in 
the tech nique of rela tion to celeb rate the 
awkward ness and disjoin ted ness of culture, 
or, as Esedebe ( 1994 ) argues, of black cent-
ral it ies. Th e myth ical narrat ive is enough to
AHUMAN, THE