ALGORITHMIC STUDIES

know ledge, its epistemic form a tions 
and formu la tions. 
 
  AS is the study of algorith mic ally 
produced networks, the machinic 
produc tion and inter- commu nic a tion 
of networked machines.  AS is, thus, the 
study of algorith mic ally enabled 
machine life. 
 
 AS  is the study of the algorithmic 
subject: the social and polit ical 
subject produced by and repro du cing 
algorithmic prac tice, and its modes 
of being, doing, and becom ing. 
 
  AS is the study of the algorith mic ally 
compelled (pre-)dict able futures, 
the consum ing subjectiv it ies it 
struc tures. 
 
  AS accord ingly is the crit ical study of 
the algorith mic ally modelled restruc-
tur ing of agency and its loss, autonomy 
and its stric tures and restric tions. 
 
 AS , in short, is the critique of 
algorithmic capit al ism, its mode of 
produc tion, being and subjectiv it ies; of 
trans it ory life; of consum ing life; of 
polit ical culture and cultural polit ics. 
 
 AS is the study of the increas ing 
trans it iv ity of data- ﬁ ed social life, its 
coding, its codes, and its applic a tions: 
the algorithmic. 
 See 
also  
Algorithm; 
Altergorithm; 
Computational Turn; Feminist Posthu-
manities; Postdisciplinarity; Tolerances 
and Duration.
for example, when we only have access to, 
and a say in, a small part of a pro ductive 
process, or when the product of our 
work becomes a mere commod ity, rather 
than some thing of shared social use. We 
are alien ated from ourselves, when we 
are either forced into, or acqui esce to, 
becom ing a thing rather than a communal 
actor; for example, when we think of 
ourselves as our price, or as our market-
abil ity. 
 According to these points of view, alien-
a tion depends on what we really are and on 
how we are kept from that – by capit al ism 
and by tradi tion, for instance. Th is more 
subtle under stand ing of alien a tion reverses 
the criti cism that can be made against the 
posthu man as alien at ing idea and process. 
It is the idea of the human that is alien at-
ing, because it imposes a false repres ent a-
tion on exist ence. We are not indi vidual 
and self- contained beings, deﬁ ned by a 
core essence, ideal, conscious ness or body. 
We are multiple processes connec ted 
across diﬀ er ent forms and places. When 
those processes are denied, when an alli-
ance with animals, or a depend ence on 
tech no logy, or a multi- agent coali tion, is 
deﬁ ned as a distor tion of a prop erly human 
core, then there is alien a tion. 
 True alien a tion happens when we cling 
to the human, against assemblages and 
forces that consti tute us as posthu man 
processes of trans form a tion. When alien a-
tion is deﬁ ned in terms of being and prop-
erty, we are led to think of the human as 
static, in the sense of having a partic u lar 
ﬁ xed state or ﬁ xed belong ings and char ac-
ter ist ics. Th is thought is itself alien at ing, 
because in truth we are always going 
beyond states, prop er ties and predic ates. 
To be posthu man is to become alien in 
many diﬀ er ent ways at the same time. 
Th us, against the accus a tion that the 
posthu man is uneth ical because it fosters 
alien a tion, posthu man theor ists have 
 ALIENATION  
 Alienation is to be rendered alien, or to 
be estranged from some thing. We can be 
alien ated from home (exile), from a ﬁ cti-
tious world (in the theatre, in the arts), 
from ourselves (accord ing to Marx, as 
alien a tion from our product ive force, 
creations and work). Alienation can imply 
depend ence on a power other than 
ourselves; when we become a market able 
commod ity, or when we are manip u lated 
by others through our feel ings and 
aﬀ ections. 
 Alienation is there fore usually a negat-
ive term, imply ing forced loss of proper 
posses sion and estrange ment from who we 
really are, or who we should be. It would 
seem, there fore, that the posthu man is 
open to a negat ive judge ment, for the 
alien a tion it implies in moves away from 
the human. To become posthu man, in alli-
ances with plants, animals, soci et ies, 
mater i als and machines, would also be to 
become alien ated. Th e posthu man might 
then be a place of exploit a tion, exile and 
loss. 
 Two senses of alien a tion begin to point 
to an answer to this criti cism. For Brecht, 
the ‘alien a tion eﬀ ect’ in theatre is a way to 
divest the audi ence of an impli cit accept-
ance of the illu sions of clas sical theatre. In 
this alien a tion, distance is created between 
the audi ence and the action on stage by 
unfa mili ar ity and discom fort. Th is has a 
posit ive goal: the audi ence has to be 
estranged from the stage in order to then 
return to it afresh and more crit ic ally alert 
to its implic a tions. Alienation is a way to a 
greater truth. 
 For Marx, alien a tion is not estrange-
ment from prop erty but from powers, 
from our communal powers to trans form 
our social worlds through joint work. 
We are alien ated when we are enclosed 
and separ ated by modes of produc tion;