ALGORITHM

of the second line speciﬁ es the process 
that the ingredi ent or vari able will 
undergo, a = a + 1, which on the ﬁ rst 
iter a tion (and all subsequent ones) 
means that every time the ‘a’ is thrown 
in the mix, it will be increased by one, 
a = 0 + 1 [there fore aft er the ﬁ rst run, 
a = 1]. Th e curly brack ets work like a 
bowl, contain ing the results of our loop. So 
the machine ‘prints’ ‘1,’, but most import-
antly, this ‘for’ demands we stay in its loop 
until ‘a’ exceeds 100. So the bowl, the print 
func tion, will be ﬁ lled until a = 100, and 
the machine will print ‘1, 2, 3, [. . .], 100’ 
and then stop. Th is result will happen in 
less than a second aft er hitting the ‘run’ or 
‘go’ feature without any neces sary under-
stand ing of the count ing and tempor al ity, 
condi tion and constraint, or design of the 
output. Th is result is  not the process. 
Neither is the explan a tion of the syntax of 
the algorithm. 
 Each char ac ter, moment of syntax and 
system func tion (‘for’) in this very simple 
bit of pseudo- code – in execu tion – is 
some thing quite diﬀ er ent  for the machine . 
Th e ‘a’, the ‘=’, and the ‘0’ of the ﬁ rst line are 
bundled bytes, code within code, corres-
pond ing to an elec tri ﬁ ed arrange ment of 
circuits, a tempor ary and stilled burn in 
memory. Th e ‘for’, the ‘a <= 100’, etc., are 
nested 
func tions, 
bundles 
of 
code 
within bundles of nested code, that make ‘a’ 
circuits dance, move, change, char ging and 
dechar ging, a rhythmic burn, unburn, burn 
inher ent in the very mater i al ity of the 
circuits. As the ‘a’ counts, iter ates to 100, the 
machine reson ates, vibrates, heats, charges, 
discharges. An algorithm is more accur-
ately under stood as an algoRhythm, mater-
ial charges, reson ances, tempor al it ies in the 
guts of the machine, and also direc ted and 
designed charges, reson ances and tem por-
al it ies distrib uted across and through its 
rhyth mic ally ener gized and promis cu ous 
inter faces, deeply compat ible across and 
mater ial rhythms, oil not butter, bananas 
not eggs, or as the tracing of a concat en a-
tion of animal and veget at ive mater ial 
rhythms. Th ese mater ial rhythmic diﬀ er-
ences might be thought of, with  substan tial 
abstrac tion, 
as 
diﬀ er ences 
between 
compos ing func tion al ity through the 
mater ial rhythms for an Android device 
versus an Apple  OS device. And the 
meta phor might extend even further to 
capture uncon scious eﬀ ects and aﬀ ects: 
the baked sugar–carbo hydrate compounds 
of pumpkin bread digest ively enter ing 
a human body increases rates and 
volumes of blood sugar, speed ing meta bol-
ism followed by a triggered insulin 
response, which slows and dulls the 
body and brain func tion (and much 
much more . . .). Relations of speed and 
slow ness, rhythms of complex intra- active 
matters, con stitutive of  a body . Th is 
rhythmic mater ial process, percept ible in 
part, known by its eﬀ ects and aﬀ ects, quite 
liter ally oper ates at the tempor al it ies of the 
human, the body, not just and not wholly 
conscious ness. 
 But what of the mater ial rhythms of 
compu ta tional algorithms? What digest ive 
correl ate that doesn’t suggest eating a 
compu ta tional device? To be expli cit, 
compu ta tional algorithms run, and only 
run, on compu ta tional devices. A pseudo- 
code example (a partial code/natural 
language artic u la tion of an algorithm/
func tion): 
 a = 0; 
 for (a <= 100; a = a + 1) { 
   print (a, “, ”) }; 
 Machines read one line at a time, top to 
bottom, unless redir ec ted. Th e ﬁ rst line, 
a = 0, is an ingredi ent, or the declar a tion 
of a vari able. Th e ﬁ rst part of the second 
line tells the machine  how long to cook for, 
a <= 100, or as long as a is less than 
or equal to 100. It  counts . Th e second part
anim al ity, the human and the non- human 
– clas sical binary oppos i tions unhinged by 
the ubiquit ous inter ven tion of tech no lo-
gical medi ation. By devel op ing sensorial 
capa cit ies and evol u tion ary ‘smart ness’, 
digital tech no lo gies make possible and 
mater i al ize another condi tion of Being 
between (or beyond?) the human and the 
animal, coin cid ing with neither but 
aﬀ ect ing both. Th ese tech no lo gies pervade 
our ﬂ esh and fuse with our skin and 
blood; they re- wire our neural networks 
and alter our thought patterns, even as 
objects acquire ever- increas ing capab il it ies 
for intel li gent learn ing, reac tion, judge-
ment 
and 
response. 
Th ese 
changes 
profoundly aﬀ ect the conscious ness, the 
sensorium, the evol u tion and the cogni tion 
of both human and non- human agents. 
Even that binary may no longer hold: 
might we start to think about the digital in 
an  ahuman  form – a digital agent in its own 
right, with its own intel li gib il ity, whose 
sense of the world is genu inely beyond the 
anthro po centric? 
 A key element of this shift  of perspect-
ive and possib il ity towards this other 
deﬁ n i tion of Being is the compu ta tional 
algorithm, brieﬂ y deﬁ ned as the instruc-
tions or rules written in an appro pri ate 
language for a computer to process a 
task and, subsequently, to perform or 
execute it. As digital tech no logy takes its 
place in the new ternary (with human ity 
and anim al ity) it accom plishes a double 
feat. Th e algorithm takes on a life of its 
own, but it also takes on our lives, to the 
extent that we can begin to speak of 
algorithmic life itself and its condi tions 
across its many instan ti ations in the world. 
As compu ta tional culture shift s and 
evolves, we can begin to clarify not only 
the state of the algorithmic condi tions in 
twenty- ﬁ rst-century living, but also to 
identify the mishaps and the ways in 
through human somatic charge, bio- 
rhythms, aﬀ ect ive–aesthetic attend an cies. 
Under a second. Black- boxed, in conscious 
eﬀ ects, exceeded in non- conscious aﬀ ects. 
Bodies, in motion and rest, constraint and 
design, ener get ics and discrete mater i al it-
ies, intra- actions, modular, autonom ous 
func tions and somatic aﬀ ec tions. 
 Swipe. Click. Hold. Check. Checksum. 
Check. Like. Buy now. 
 Posthuman algoRhythms. 
 Google’s inva sion of our data privacy 
doesn’t even begin to scratch the skin. 
 See also  Computational Turn; Altergorithm; 
Algorithmic 
Studies; 
 AI 
(Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence), Informatic Opacity, Metadata 
Society, Networked Aﬀ ect, Non- human 
Agency, Posthuman Ethics. 
 Jamie ‘Skye’ Bianco 
 ALGORITHMIC STUDIES  
 Algorithmic studies rest on the epistem o-
lo gical asser tion that digital tech no lo gies 
remodel the condi tions of possib il ity for a 
number of crucial discurs ive and mater ial 
prac tices. Th ese prac tices and their modes 
of produc tion, repres ent a tion, distri bu tion 
and circu la tion include the deﬁ n i tion of 
Being, the struc tur ing of the Social, the 
instru ment al iz a tion of the Political and 
the anim a tion of the Cultural. Th rough 
intense inter ven tions into the very struc-
ture of these key concep tual prac tices, they 
re- tool – and in many ways manu fac ture 
anew – the very nature of what we under-
stand as life itself. 
 Bruno Latour and Eduardo Viveiros de 
Castro, among others, have commen ted on 
the signi ﬁ c ant shift s under gone by categor-
ical distinc tions that had been upheld with 
relat ive stabil ity within the western project 
of modern ity. Consider the growing indis-