ALTERGORITHM

models that, ﬁ rst, relate to the possib il ity 
of a world that devel ops diﬀ er ently with, 
or even inde pend ently from human inter-
ac tion; and second, utilize tech no cratic 
models of predic tion to envis age these 
altern at ive scen arios that defy all predic tion. 
Th e point here seems less a plea for a world 
without humans, than a world where 
humans are able to consider options other 
than the ones stem ming from their own 
local ized, embod ied brains, options that 
may well support those humans’ oppor tun-
it ies for survival. In this sense, I guess, the 
alter gorithm in the arts does not have to 
look long for its philo soph ical coun ter-
parts: new mater i al ism, spec u lat ive realism, 
object- oriented onto logy ( OOO ). 
 See also Algorithm; Algorithmic Studies; 
Informatic Opacity; Makehuman; Post 
Internet; Tolerances and Duration.
are simil arly deeply gram mat ic al ized, and 
that makes it partic u larly fascin at ing. Th is 
combin a tion of para- or extra- linguistic 
rich ness along side a deeply gram mat ic al-
ized pres ence suggests there is much to 
explore here, chal lenging the idea of any 
simple border between the linguistic and 
the non- linguistic. 
 First, the linguist ics. consider the 
phrases: the food that we eat. Th e mice that 
cats catch. Th e hikers that rocks crush. In 
this last example, the diﬃ   culty frequently 
exper i enced by English speak ers in 
processing this phrase has much to do with 
the inan im acy of the rock (which plays an 
agent role in rela tion to the verb crush) as 
compared to the animacy of the hikers, 
who in this scen ario play an object role. 
‘Th e hikers that rocks crush’ thus viol ates a 
cross- linguistic animacy pref er ence among 
speak ers. Th ey tend to prefer animate head 
nouns to go with subject- extrac ted relat ive 
clauses (the hikers who __ crushed the 
rock) or inan im ate head nouns to go with 
object- extrac ted relat ive clauses (the rock 
that the hiker crushed __). Add to this that 
there is a smaller plaus ib il ity that rocks will 
agen t ively crush hikers than that hikers 
will agen t ively crush rocks: a concep tual 
order of things, an animate hier archy of 
possible acts, begins to take shape. 
 Even within the case of ‘the hikers that 
rocks crush’, however, it is only within a 
speciﬁ c cosmo logy that stones so obvi-
ously lack agency or could be the source 
of caus al ity; in numer ous indi gen ous 
cultures, includ ing the native Hawaiian 
people, Kanaka Maoli, stones can be taken 
as living beings. But these are deval ued 
accounts 
within 
geopol it ical 
spaces 
domin ated by settler colo ni al ism and 
suppor ted by the hege mony of languages 
such as English. Paralleling this, we also 
ﬁ nd patterns of  de human iz a tion within 
which those in speciﬁ c circum stances of 
 ANIMACIES  
 Animacies raise a twofold issue. On the 
one hand, there are oblig at ory, cross- 
linguistic  gram mat ical  and argu ably also 
 hege mon ic ally encoded oblig a tions to 
register degrees of animacy, that is, levels 
of sentience, mobil ity, person hood or live-
ness. On the other hand, they suggest 
consequences for cultural polit ics and 
theory, partic u larly along the lines of race, 
colo ni al ity, gender and dis/ability. 
 Animacy’s history as a linguistic 
concept is traced to cross- linguistic studies 
of grammar, ﬁ rst noted by the linguistic 
anthro po lo gist Michael Silverstein in  1976 . 
He sugges ted that ‘animacy hier arch ies’ 
were an import ant area of inter sec tion 
between meaning and grammar. Even 
within linguist ics today, animacy most 
gener ally refers to the gram mat ical eﬀ ects 
of the sentience or live ness of noun phrases, 
but this ostens ibly simple meaning opens 
into much wider conver sa tions. 
 In my book on this topic,  Animacies 
(2012), the plur al ity of the title acknow-
ledges that I have built on and expan ded 
beyond the original concep tual appar atus 
of animacy as deﬁ ned in linguist ics. Th ere 
are speciﬁ c approaches one can take while 
explor ing animacies’ cultural polit ics, 
drawing upon a number of oft en segreg-
ated discourses. Each has its set of sens ib il-
it ies – for instance, queer theory gives a 
feeling for the regu la tion of intim acy, and 
crit ical race provides a sense of the subtle 
ways that racial iz a tion can happen. A 
trans dis cip lin ary approach to animacy 
means that for every point of inquiry there 
are many struc tural under stand ings, which 
might be brought to bear, together, upon it. 
 Pluralizing the term is also to recog nize 
that even  within linguist ics schol ar ship, 
animacy remains a myster i ous, mobile 
thing, just beyond one’s reach, and yet 
having a power ful hold on language. It