ANIMACIES

hier archy is doomed to fail, to have gaps. 
Above all, animacy is polit ical, shaped by 
what or who counts as human, and what or 
who does not. 
 Th e hier arch ical scale posi tions human-
ity in one place and animals in another 
place, despite humans’ resol utely animal 
being, and leaves inan im ate objects in 
several signi ﬁ c ant ways out of the equa tion. 
We could say that govern ments in the 
perpetual race of capit al ism disreg ard 
envir on mental concerns to pursue the 
commod ity, but there is some thing else 
going on in the prior it ies of matter itself 
that makes envir on ment al ism seem unim-
port ant. Ultimately I am arguing that these 
inan im ate objects in the world, despite 
their margin al iz a tion, are exceed ingly 
import ant. Th ey are the doubled matter of 
biopol it ics: the idea of polit ical power or 
govern ment, 
not 
neces sar ily 
through 
govern mental bodies, which takes biolo-
gical life as its point of manage ment and 
control. Th ey further more parti cip ate in 
complex ways in race, gender and sexu al ity 
discourses. Th e busi ness of animacy theory 
is about how the respect ive posi tions and 
inter re la tions between humans, inan im ate 
objects and non- human animals are ostens-
ibly explained in rela tion to one another, 
when they are in fact inter twined in further, 
surpris ing ways. Th ese include the surpris-
ing racial iz a tions and sexu al iz a tions and 
abil it ies/disab il it ies that under run the hier-
archy of animacy. 
 In this analysis words, and genres of 
language, become akin to a ﬁ rst level of 
anim a tion, a primary site in which the 
matter of the world takes shape and is 
aﬀ ect ively informed, in this case for 
humans. Non- human animals take crit ical 
places in both theory and in cultural 
produc tion. And in this analysis we also 
become exposed to the aﬀ ectiv it ies of lead 
and mercury as indus trial pollut ants that 
simul tan eously  aﬀ ect , in the popular sense 
struc tural 
poverty, 
disab il ity, 
racism, 
gender, are considered less fully human 
than others who are in posi tions of 
hierarchal priv ilege. Th is inter pret a tion is 
accur ate insofar as the embel lish ment of 
human ness is only aﬀ orded to some, 
whereas others become, for certain 
circum stances, biopol it ic ally ‘no better 
than’ those in posi tions lower in the 
animate hier archy. How else can we explain 
the utility and potency of ﬁ gur at ive 
resources that, for instance, anim al ize the 
human targets of racism? Th is leads to 
situ ations within domin ant languages 
such as English in which non- human 
animals  and humans stereo typed as 
passive, such as people with cognit ive or 
phys ical disab il it ies, inev it ably are subjec-
ted to the calcu lus of animacy: what 
happens when they are intu it ively judged 
as less animate? What are the full 
consequences of this posi tion? 
 Hence while I consider the animacy 
hier archy as a preval ent concep tual struc-
ture that might come out of under stand ings 
of life li ness, sentience, agency, ability and 
mobil ity in a richly textured world, I actively 
contex tu al ize this hier archy as a polit ic ally 
domin ant one, poten tially aﬀ ected and 
shaped by the spread of Christian cosmo lo-
gies, capit al ism and the colo nial orders of 
things. Animacy’s ‘grammar’ thus extends 
beyond linguistic coer cion to broader 
strokes of biopol it ical governance. I read 
this animacy hier archy, treated by linguists 
as an avowedly concep tual organ iz a tion of 
worldly and abstract things with gram mat-
ical consequence, as a story of  relat ive 
agency. Animacy hier arch ies are precisely 
about which things can or cannot aﬀ ect – or 
be aﬀ ected by – which other things within a 
speciﬁ c 
scheme 
of 
possible 
action. 
Moreover, I study not only this domin ant 
animacy hier archy’s norms, but also its 
leak ages, its ‘ambi val ent gram mat ic al it ies’, to 
map the ways in which such a concep tual
Th ere is there fore a coer cive under pin-
ning to the primacy of English transna-
tion ally (with clear doub ling consequences 
for schol ar ship) that reaches beyond the 
fact that it must be spoken for economic 
advant age, and that under pin ning involves 
a mandate to treat certain aﬀ ects, certain 
agen cies and certain rela tional conﬁ g ur a-
tions as plaus ible, and others as implaus-
ible. Ultimately, animacies are meant to 
explore the kind of possib il ity for justice 
within concep tions of matter in which 
humans play only a part. 
 See also Animal; Animism; In-Human; In/
Human; Posthuman Ethics; Postanimalism. 
 Mel Y. Chen 
 ANIMAL  
 Animals are living beings of various kinds. 
According to the famous Chinese encyc lo-
pae dia, quoted by J. L. Borges, quoted by 
Foucault, 
 animals are divided into: (a) belong ing 
to the emperor, (b) embalmed, (c) tame, 
(d) sucking pigs, (e) sirens, (f) fabulous, 
(g) stray dogs, (h) included in the present 
clas si ﬁ c a tion, (i) fren zied, (j) innu mer-
able, (k) drawn with a very ﬁ ne camel hair 
brush, (1)  et cetera , (m) having just broken 
the water pitcher, (n) that from a long way 
oﬀ  look like ﬂ ies. 
 Foucault 1973 : xv 
 Th is is only one of many possible ways to 
clas sify animals with which we share the 
planet. Th us, Aristotle divides living beings 
into animals that have blood and animals 
that do not. All the animals with blood, 
accord ing to Aristotle, have a spine. In 
Lamarck, animals are divided into verte-
brates and inver teb rates. George Cuvier 
combined the prin ciples of both Lamarck 
of toxins, as well as  eﬀ ect , living bodies. 
Animacy theory allows one to ques tion the 
self- evident relev ance of a word like 
‘toxicity’. 
 In the original study of animacy by 
linguistic anthro po lo gist Michael Silverstein 
that I mentioned above, selec ted indi gen ous 
American and Australian languages, includ-
ing indi gen ous North American Chinookan, 
Australian Dyirbal and other indi gen ous 
Australian languages, were all iden ti ﬁ ed as 
sharing such hier arch ies with Indo-
European 
languages. 
Th at 
indi gen ous 
languages have been at the found a tion of 
linguistic animacy theory, and yet that in 
terms of governance indi gen ous groups 
have been targets of cosmo lo gical viol ence 
under settler colo ni al ism, appears para dox-
ical. But it is worth noting that the fact of 
hier arch ical categor iz a tion can mean a 
variety of diﬀ er ent things. It can mean either 
suprem acy or simply diﬀ er ence, which may 
mean that one can’t equate the animacy 
hier arch ies of some indi gen ous languages 
and cosmo lo gies with some colo nial 
languages. Furthermore, as my book 
 Animacies details, there are some troub ling 
patterns in the linguistic research that 
default to a kind of dehis tor icized account of 
animacy, which neut ral izes the polit ics of 
the patterns we observe. Indeed colo nial 
prac tices oft en use indi gen ous forms of 
trans- animate 
co- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
against 
them selves (as in, their prim it iv isms have 
not advanced to a proper under stand ing 
 of justi ﬁ ed human – that is to say, white – 
suprem acy). Within schol ar ship there are 
tensions worth sitting with and explor ing, 
not only to take in the radical viol ence of the 
ongoing occu pa tion of indi gen ous and 
other spaces in ways that do and do not 
mimic the more limited set of rela tions 
under European colon iz a tion, but also to ask 
in what ways schol ar ship habitu ally ignores 
or consumes indi gen ous know ledges and 
what are the ethical rami ﬁ c a tions.