ANIMISM

century, with its concerns over media, 
mater i al ity and the valid ity of non-
European know ledge. 
 Drawing on clas sical philo sophy and 
a then- viru lent debate on vital ism and 
spir it ism, it was Edward B. Tylor (who held 
the ﬁ rst univer sity chair in anthro po logy) 
who gave the term its collo quial meaning 
in his major work  Primitive Culture (1871), 
signi fy ing a ‘belief in spirits’ that for Tylor 
was the univer sal origin of reli gion. Th e 
term carried the alleg a tion that so- called 
prim it ive cultures were incap able of assess-
ing the mater ial world. 
 Tylor claimed that every reli gion 
stemmed from the attri bu tion of life, soul 
or spirit to inan im ate objects. According 
to this theory, Europeans have advanced 
from animism, via poly the ism, to mono-
the ism, and from there to the highest stage 
of science, rising from a state of nature to 
one of civil iz a tion. In contrast, indi gen ous 
peoples of North and South America, 
Africa, Asia and Polynesia were left  behind 
during this evol u tion ary process and 
remain as the savage surviv als of a natural 
state. But while Tylor legit im ized the colo-
nial agenda both expli citly and impli citly, 
he also was among those European writers 
who insisted early on about the mental 
unity of all mankind – a fact that was of 
great signi ﬁ c ance in a climate of scientiﬁ c 
racism that oft en expli citly denied non-
Europeans ration al ity or even human ity. 
Despite its enorm ous inﬂ u ence in cultural 
theory from psycho logy to art, Tylor’s 
animism was long shunned through out the 
twen ti eth century due to its all too expli cit 
evol u tion ism and its invest ment in what 
Claude Lévi-Strauss termed the ‘archaic 
illu sion’ – the fallacy char ac ter istic of 
modern prim it iv ism that blended chil dren, 
savages and the insane and declared them 
to be surviv als of an archaic past. In the late 
 ANIMISM  
 ‘Animism’ desig nates a cosmos in which 
theor et ic ally everything is alive and 
commu nic at ing, and poten tially possesses 
the qual it ies of being ‘a person’ or, at the 
very least, an agent of some kind. It 
describes a world in which all social and 
onto lo gical bound ar ies are porous and can 
be crossed under speciﬁ c circum stances, a 
world of becom ings and meta morph oses, 
in which no entity precedes the sets of 
rela tions that bring it into being. 
 From the perspect ive of state order, 
insofar as the latter relies on stable iden tit-
ies, all kinds of anim isms pose a poten tial 
threat. Th e discourse about ‘savage’ 
animism is hence above all a ques tion of 
what is permit ted into the social collect ive, 
with full status and rights, and what gains 
only minor or subjug ated status or is 
completely excluded. Th e border of separ-
a tion between the fully ‘human’ and its 
others – the prim it ive, the savage, the 
animal, the insane – is not simply a given, 
but a cultural construc tion  and evol u tion-
ary product at the same time, with some 
distinc tions argu ably less mutable then 
others – for the border between a plant and 
a human to be crossed, an entire cosmo-
logy and its order of the elements would 
need to be upset. 
 Colonial Implications 
 Animism, derived from the Latin  anima , 
inex tric ably links ques tions of commu nic-
ab il ity and media with long- embattled 
ques tions over the soul and its rela tion to 
mater i al ity. Is the soul an enclosed prop erty 
of human beings alone or a realm of 
medi al ity, the condi tion of possib il ity to 
be- in-a- medium-of- commu nic a tion? 
Inheriting earlier theo lo gical discourses 
trans posed into secular and novel scientiﬁ c 
vocab u lar ies, the concept came to be a
their others, as the minimum demand put 
forth by the concept is that at least these 
borders and their under ly ing categor ies 
can poten tially be re- thought. Th e char ac-
ter of the concept as a real concep tual and 
imagin ary limit is under lined by the fact 
that for the major ity of European authors 
writing on animism, just like Tylor, the 
‘spirits’ of others actu ally remain enig matic 
and inac cess ible. ‘Spirits’ appear to categor-
ic ally escape the objec ti ﬁ c a tion methods 
of Western epistem o logy. Within their 
respect ive systems of know ledge and 
discip lines, most authors are incap able of 
acknow ledging their onto lo gical status as 
‘real’, and hence trans pose them into other 
onto lo gical desig na tions – as phenom ena 
of psycho logy or even art. 
 To talk of animism today still means to 
approach the limits of the matrix of Western 
thought. With this concept, modern ity 
sought to diﬀ er en ti ate itself from its other 
with a gesture of inclus ive exclu sion, assign-
ing such other ness a place within its own 
matrix. Th e other ness of animism is simul-
tan eously a horizon that circum scribes and 
encircles modern ity and its civil iz a tional 
discourse, from both the past and the future. 
From the past, because the animism 
described by the ethno lo gists and psycho lo-
gists of the late nine teenth century as the 
prim or dial ground of ‘reli gion’ (cf.  Hörl 2005 ; 
 Schüttpelz 1872 ;  Schott 2015 ) is that which 
modern civil iz a tion must suppress and leave 
behind in order to become civil ized and 
modern. But animism also appears at the 
other end of the vector of time – as a future 
condi tion in which alien a tion and the great 
divides of modern ity are imagined as over-
come. A politi cized discourse on animism 
hence may ask not about the subjectiv ity of 
percep tion, but about the subjectiv ity of the 
so- called object. It is not only the histori-
ography of slavery and colo ni al ism that 
demands that the ques tion of animism be 
approached inside out, as it were.  
nine teenth and early twen ti eth centur ies 
‘animism’ was frequently invoked in the 
European struggle to account for the onto-
lo gical enigma of the mode of commu nic-
a tion in so- called prim it ive soci et ies, as 
well as medi umistic phenom ena inside 
Western soci et ies and the rise of tech no lo-
gical media. Th e discourse of animism 
hence consti tuted a ‘media- tech no lo gical 
phant asm’ (see  Hörl 2015 ) situ ated onto lo-
gic ally in the abyss between the dicho tom-
ies opened up by (Cartesian) poles of 
matter and mind, subject and object, 
humans and nature. It is equally invoked 
with great frequency whenever the concep-
tual certain ties related to these poles and 
their mode of repres ent a tion are frac tured, 
desig nat ing a liminal zone in the encounter 
with alter ity and onto lo gical diﬀ er ence. 
Th roughout its history, the term stands 
for the attempt to ﬁ xate contra dict ory 
moments of concep tual bewil der ment, 
from the promise of trans form ab il ity and 
unboun ded intel li gib il ity across onto lo-
gical divides, to the exper i ence of these 
divides as unbridge able and untrans lat able. 
 Contemporary Uses 
 In recent years, the concept has been 
revived in debates that crit ic ally mirror 
and ques tion the onto lo gical parti tions 
and assump tions of modern ity and its 
stand ard meta phys ics. Th e new under-
stand ings of animism are not based on the 
funda ment of iden tity and being, but 
rather on becom ings, echoing an altern at-
ive strand of Western philo sophy. 1 Th is 
resur gence of animism as ‘rela tional onto-
logy’ is perhaps symp to matic of a wider 
crisis of Western object iv ism under a new 
inform a tion paradigm (see  Hörl 2015 ). 
 Th e contin ued chal lenge of the concept 
of animism lies in the imper at ive to re- 
think the border between humans and