ANIMAL

category. Th is is called human excep tion. 
However, in fact humans are, of course, 
animals, too, as they are born, breathe, 
move, eat other living things, repro duce 
and even tu ally die. Angels, even though 
they do not die, can also be regarded as 
animals, since they possess wings, claws, 
talons and tails; everything which has 
a tail must be qual i ﬁ ed as animal, aero-
planes, comets and rockets included, in 
spite of the fact that human beings usually 
separ ate celes tial bodies and machines 
with tails from other beasts. Finally, gods 
are animals. At least, they were. At the 
cradle of human ity, our ﬁ rst gods were 
animals. 
 Prehistoric people believed in the divine 
nature of animals they saw around, and 
used to draw them on the walls and ceil-
ings of their caves. Th ese paint ings were 
icons of prehis toric men. Lizards, snakes, 
elephants, lions, eagles, giraﬀ es and other 
great things that they met did not work and 
did not speak languages, there fore they 
were considered higher than men. Th ey 
were, and they still are, as Georges Bataille 
puts it, sover eign, or ‘essen tially free beings’ 
( Bataille 1986 ). However, the atti tude 
towards animals in ancient totem ism was 
extremely ambigu ous. Animals were fore-
fath ers and gods, but at the same time 
provided people with everything they 
needed for life – food, habit a tion, clothes, 
tools and arms. Th eir ﬂ esh, their skins, 
bones, horns – everything was of use. 
For this, people were killing animals, 
but if these animals were their gods, great 
ancest ors or other divine entit ies, such 
killings were called sacri ﬁ ces. Sometimes 
sacri ﬁ ced animals were invited to the feast 
where their own ﬂ esh was served and 
where all members of a given community 
– say tribe – were prais ing them while 
eating them. 
and Aristotle: in his theory, verteb rates 
have red blood, and inver teb rates have 
white. 
Generally 
speak ing, 
Lamarck 
thinks the same way, but he deﬁ nes blood 
through the intens ity of its red colour. 
Th erefore, accord ing to him, inver teb rates 
do not have true blood, which is red, 
and so on. Hegel, in his turn, bases further 
clas si ﬁ c a tion of verteb rates on the elements 
to which animal bodies are adapted – that 
is, earth, air or water – and thus we have 
land animals, birds and ﬁ sh ( Hegel 2007 : 
425). One could also divide animals into 
human, non- human, pre- human and 
posthu man. 
 An almost inﬁ n ite variety of today’s 
animals emerged as a result of the so- called 
Cambrian explo sion and the Skeleton 
revolu tion, which happened around 500 
million years ago. Th is revolu tion gave 
to animals not only exoskel et ons, but 
complex organs, eyes and even brains. 
Before that, animals existed, too, but they 
were abso lutely diﬀ er ent. Some of them 
resembled inﬂ at able mattresses; others 
were rather like discs, tubes or mud- ﬁ lled 
bags. Th ese organ isms, called Ediacaran 
biota, which are now completely extinct, 
were mostly sessile, perman ently attached 
to their places. In contrast to them, perhaps 
the main thing which all contem por ary 
animals have in common is their motil ity, 
although there are animals that still prefer 
to rest. 
 Traditionally animals are diﬀ er en ti ated 
from plants, mush rooms, bacteria and stuﬀ  
like this, on the one hand, and human 
beings, angels, machines and gods, on the 
other. Th ese divi sions, made by science, 
are, of course, very conven tional. In a way, 
every living thing has some thing animal in 
it, at least if we pay closer atten tion to the 
etymo logy, which shows that the word 
‘animal’ derives from  anima , a Latin term 
for the soul and the anim at ing prin ciple of 
life. Human beings oft en exclude them-
ANIMISM (LIMULUS)