ANONYMITY

may also invert and become a deﬁ n ing 
contour of a literal concrete border wall. 
 Alongside this condi tion is that of the 
rela tion between privacy and anonym ity in 
digital media. Whereas anonym ity is to not 
yet become named or to exist outside of 
the condi tion of the regis tra tion of names, 
privacy is to main tain iden tity as a 
resource; to parcel it out, to operate with it 
as it has already entered the economy of 
iden ti ﬁ c a tion but held in reserve as an 
asset within possess ive indi vidu al ism. Th e 
large- scale plat forms that aim at produ-
cing and enfor cing global mono pol ies in 
partic u lar vari et ies of digital inform a tion 
services have the erasure of anonym ity as a 
core busi ness aim. Subsequently, what 
passes for privacy is also eroded by them. 
Part of this condi tion is what makes for 
new polit ical move ments: those that 
embrace privacy as a form of human right; 
and those that engender anonym ity as a 
form of conﬂ ict and refusal. Anonymity as 
a condi tion, in the ﬁ gure of the multiple- 
name ‘Anonymous’ used by hackers, is also 
a declar a tion of solid ar ity in this condi-
tion, a ﬁ gure of the unknown as one of 
gener os ity ( Coleman 2014 ). Here, those 
iden ti ﬁ ed and isol ated from this current 
have oft en shown them selves to have an 
astute polit ical analysis of the present day. 
 One partic u lar episode is perhaps 
symp to matic of the inter con nec ted fault 
lines of this condi tion. In 2012, people 
using the Anonymous name leaked the 
email log of the consultancy group Stratfor 
via WikiLeaks. Stratfor’s work involves 
trading in polit ical and economic infor m-
ation, oft en against polit ical activ ists 
and human rights move ments, espe cially 
those that may have some consequence for 
the contin ued proﬁ t ab il ity of resource- 
extrac tion based indus tries. Th e inform a-
tion that led to the public release of this 
data came from a hacker called Sabu, 
an  FBI -suppor ted agent provocateur. Th e 
the speciﬁ c condi tion also that such polit-
ics is also partially prepared and embed-
ded in tech no lo gical forms. One can say 
that there are broadly two tend en cies here, 
neither of which is immune from the 
other: the discourse of human rights and 
the related though partially contra dict ory 
one of the tension between anonym ity and 
privacy in compu ta tional and networked 
digital media. 
 In the contem por ary era, human rights 
has been formu lated as against the 
anonym iz ing func tions of cells, torture, 
mass graves and labour camps, which 
them selves used mech an isms of iden ti ﬁ c a-
tion and enumer a tion aimed at erasing the 
singu lar ity of a person ( Wachsmann 2015 ). 
Human rights discourse consists of identi-
fy ing and raising to a level of atten tion 
those who are eﬀ aced and dismembered. It 
extols and defends people without the 
papers that name, those without access to 
anything but anonym ity. It makes public 
the means of erasure and provides a means 
of reverse- engin eer ing such processes to 
name their mech an isms and their oper a-
tors ( Forensic Architecture 2014 ). In doing 
so it must nego ti ate the diﬃ   culty of pro-
posing a univer sal ized version of human ity 
that acts not as a condi tion of solid ar ity but 
as an agent of diﬀ er en ti ation of what falls 
above and below such a stand ard and that 
can thus, once codi ﬁ ed and turned into a 
legal oper ator in itself, be manip u lated in 
turn against the condi tions that it aimed at 
defend ing. Such, for instance, is the condi-
tion in Gaza where, as Eyal Weizman 
describes it, the legal defences of human 
rights are used by Israeli milit ary lawyers 
as a means to describe, and thus tighten, 
the inside of a tour ni quet ( Weizman 2012 ). 
Human rights thus becomes a para dox ical 
yet univer sal found a tion that is at once 
both a Möbius strip, turning itself inside 
out in grot esque convo lu tions, but also 
essen tial, a barrier and a barri cade, that
ANTHROPISM/IMMANENT HUMANISM