ANTHROPOCENE

massive level changes ( Steﬀ en, Crutzen 
and McNeill 2007 : 615). Hence, discus-
sions of the air are about the Earth too 
while the future of the geolo gic era might 
be some thing determ ined by the oceans 
and espe cially the melting ice (Wolﬀ  2014). 
 Th e concept of the Antropocene marks 
an inter twin ing of geolo gical Earth time 
and human history; it trig gers massive 
amounts of paper work, data, discus sions, 
confer ences, art works and philo soph ical 
ideas as well of course as misrep res ent a-
tions in its wake. Suggested by chemist Paul 
Crutzen in 2000 it has launched a wide 
debate in both geology and the wider 
academic and art communit ies. Th e term 
suggests that the ten to twelve millen nia of 
the Holocene is followed up by the accel er-
ated version of human impact on the planet 
( Crutzen 2002 ). One of the peri od iz a tions 
for the start of the Anthropocene marks it 
as start ing in the eight eenth century ‘when 
analyses of air trapped in polar ice showed 
the begin ning of growing global concen-
tra tions of carbon dioxide and methane’ 
(ibid.). In any case, the analyses usually 
converge around the period as one of new 
imbal ance in ‘the stocks and ﬂ ows of 
major elements in the plan et ary machinery 
such as nitro gen, carbon, phos phorus, 
and silicon’ ( Steﬀ en et al. 2007 : 614) as well 
as energy consump tion. Similar concepts 
have emerged since the nine teenth century, 
includ ing Antonio Stoppani’s ‘Anthropozoic 
era’, but only in the 2000s has the impact of 
the concept itself consol id ated around 
issues with polit ical and scientiﬁ c eﬃ  c acy. 
Already the earlier ideas marked the 
speciﬁ c diﬀ er ence of human impact from 
natural vari ation that has then become an 
object of analysis with speciﬁ c scientiﬁ c 
tools that discuss the histor ical aspects – 
what is a suit able start date for this period 
– as well as its future implic a tions: what is 
the tipping point of no return in the process 
of accel er a tion? Hence we are not dealing 
where diﬀ er ent forms of docu ment a tion 
and diﬀ er ent prac tices of power aﬀ ect 
the overall system. World- systems develop 
through tipping points, through trans itions 
that bring the systems from one level of 
complex ity and coher ence to another. Th is 
is a complex process which leaves strat i ﬁ c a-
tions in language, social rela tions, ideas 
and rituals. It also leaves mater ial forms in 
its wake: the intric ate geomet ries of cities, 
monu ments, ﬁ elds and infra struc tures that 
sustain a speciﬁ c form of a world- system 
are carried over from one world- system to 
a new one. Monuments, docu ments and 
tech no lo gies are the mater ial inscrip tions of 
world- systems. To decipher them, humans 
need to concep tu al ize their own history in 
rela tion to the history of the planet. 
 Anthropocene Observatory is a project 
by Territorial Agency (John Palmesino and 
Ann-Soﬁ  Rönnskog), Armin Linke and 
Anselm Franke. 
 See also Anthropocene, Capitalocene 
and Chthulucene; Resilience; Expulsions; 
Extinction; Hacking Habitat. 
 John Palmesino and Ann-Soﬁ  
Rönnskog – Territorial Agency 
and Armin Linke  
 ANTHROPOCENE  
 Much of the debate about the global 
climate change is oft en discussed through 
the amount of  CO 2 concen tra tion in the 
atmo sphere. But besides the atmosphere 
and questions about fresh water and ocean 
ecosystems, the geological has also become 
one central perspective for understanding 
the fundamental change concerning the 
planet. It relates to a recog ni tion of the 
Earth as a whole, inter locked feed back 
system with various nonlin ear speeds and 
rates of change that can however trigger
resources. Indeed, meta bol ism was a term 
used by Marx to ‘deﬁ ne the labor process as 
“a process between man and nature, a 
process by which man, through his own 
actions, medi ates, regu lates and controls 
the meta bol ism between himself and 
nature” ’ ( Foster 2000 : 141). Interestingly, 
the Modern era – so crucial as a refer ence 
point for the social sciences espe cially – 
was itself as a concept an attempt to purify 
Nature out of human activ it ies, which, 
however, itself hides the multiple attach-
ments across any arti ﬁ  cial Nature–Nurture 
divide and the diﬃ  culty of detaching 
politics from science and nature ( Latour 
2014a : 21). More speciﬁ c ally, and with a 
more acute aware ness of the polit ical 
economy of the Anthropocene, McKenzie 
Wark ( 2015a ) contin ues Marx’s theor et iz a-
tion by point ing out that one can actu ally 
under stand the Anthropocene as meta-
bolic rift s, move ment of mater i als and the 
labour that mobil izes these elements. 
 With the Anthropocene, any earlier 
peri od iz a tion is even more directly driven 
by a scientiﬁ c under stand ing of the Earth. 
It involves an analysis of human impact 
but also the other way round: to read 
human history through chem istry, the 
atmo sphere, the geolo gical and more. 
Th ere is an impli cit chal lenge here to the 
Humanities. It is hence no wonder that it 
becomes itself a useful trigger for a variety 
of approaches that are inter ested in the 
non- human and posthu man. Th ese are 
import ant ways to steer clear of the anthro-
po centric fallacy and towards, for example, 
a more geocentric under stand ing of the 
plan et ary life (see e.g.  Braidotti 2012 . 
 Bennett 2010 ). Furthermore, it intro duces 
new ways to think about time not merely 
in terms of human history but as time 
marked by chro no strati graphy that uses 
rock strata as the main focus for under-
stand ing evol u tion and change. As such, it 
reson ates with various ideas in the past 
with a naive assump tion of ‘balance’ of the 
planet but a histor iciz a tion of the chem ical 
doses and elements, of reac tions and 
processes as one signi ﬁ c ant context where 
the polit ics of exist ence of life unfolds. 
 In many ways, a lot of the accounts 
includ ing the more popular texts about the 
Anthropocene reson ate with histor ies of 
tech no logy: the emer gence of agri cul ture 
is one crucial threshold that has changed 
the chem ical rela tions of the Earth. Th e 
inven tion of ﬁ re is another. Th e steam 
engine gets a frequent mention in narra-
tives of the Anthropocene, as well as 
modern synthetic chem istry. One of the 
key issues is of course the radical change in 
the energy economy: from the use of wind 
and water to the excav a tion of fossil fuels 
such as coal and oil. Th e accounts of the 
Great Acceleration focus on the energy 
and war econom ies aft er 1945 with an 
intens i ﬁ c a tion since the 1950s because of 
the increase in nuclear bomb testing; the 
global processes of urban iz a tion; increase 
in fertil izer use and various other types 
of processes of tech no lo gical society 
( Zalasiewicz et al. 2014 ). 
 Humanities and social sciences have 
anyway in the past oft en relied on gener al-
iz ing peri od iz a tions. Human history has 
been divided into epochs of capit al ism, 
imper i al ism and colo ni al ism, as well as 
other earlier periods that oﬀ er heur istic 
support to under stand histor ical time. 
Some of the archae olo gical periods place 
special emphasis on the main mater i als 
around which culture is organ ized: the 
Stone Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age. Some 
of the later concepts have also under stood 
that the rela tion to natural resources is 
signi ﬁ c ant in order to under stand that 
period. For example, Karl Marx’s analyses 
are obvi ously very aware of the chan ging 
indus trial basis of produc tion, from agri-
cul tural rela tions to the new meta bol ism 
produced by capit al ism’s focus on natural