ANTHROPOCENE OBSERVATORY

as much as local contin gen cies and imme-
di ate actions have. 
 Th e inter twined rela tion between the 
history of nations and the history of the 
Earth has been at the centre of many diﬀ er-
ent concep tu al iz a tions and civil iz a tions 
over time. Th e devel op ment of these 
concepts, their speciﬁ c history, their form-
al iz a tion, struc tur ing and diﬀ u sion are 
equally a key element in the form a tion of 
world- systems. 
 World- systems are a coher ent, sweep ing 
force, unfold ing across large areas and 
through economic, social, polit ical and 
cultural struc tures and inter ac tions. Th ey 
operate at very high levels of coher ence and 
unfold at scales well beyond the indi vidual 
elements that shape them. Th ey are whole: 
the bound ar ies they struc ture and the ﬂ ows 
of energy, money, ideas, language, social 
class and rank, law, popu la tion and power 
that char ac ter ize each world- system in its 
partic u lar devel op ment shape complete 
systems which operate as a complex 
entit ies. 
 Th e social construc tion of time and 
space evolves through rapid trans form a-
tions, a succes sion of diﬀ er ent dynam ics, 
between living forms and their inor ganic 
envir on ments aﬀ ects the atmo sphere, 
global temper at ure, ocean salin ity, oxygen 
in the air, the water cycles and the carbon 
and nitro gen cycles that guar an tee that life 
is sustained on our planet. 
 Th e devel op ment of Earth System 
sciences over the last decades has indic ated 
that human activ ity is deeply aﬀ ect ing 
the entire system. Th e atmo sphere, the 
geosphere, the cryo sphere, the biosphere 
and the hydro sphere are faced with new 
forces, mobil iz ing the Earth towards 
instabil ity and possible great ﬂ uc tu ations 
in its inter de pend ent dynam ics. 
 World- systems 
 Human systems and soci et ies have forms 
that develop over history. Th e speciﬁ c 
human rela tions are shaped, struc tured 
and hardened by these histor ical processes. 
Individuals, groups and soci et ies are 
shaped in their inter ac tions by these 
processes as much as they contrib ute to 
their dynam ics. Long- term inhab it a tion of 
cities, lands and territ or ies, intric ate 
networks of commu nic a tion, long- term 
devel op ment of every day life- forms and 
 Copper mine. Chuquicamata, Chile 1999.  ARMIN LINKE
Bloemenveiling Aalsmeer, fl ower auction, test room. Amsterdam, Netherlands 1998.   ARMIN LINKE  
 Greenhouse. El Ejido, Spain 2013.   ARMIN LINKE