ARCHITECTONIC DISPOSITION

(ther mo dy namic conser va tion), Vitruvius’ 
appar ent failure reveals itself as its very 
mark of distinc tion and excel lence: whatever 
the value this worth preserves may be – 
beauty, harmony, the good, etc. – such an 
approach at system at iz a tion in order to 
conserve, without ﬁ ght ing the impur ity of 
the system intro duced through trans form a-
tions (its histor icity), lives from  not specify-
ing the nature of this value in any determ in-
ate manner (see  Negentropy ,  Invariance ). 
 Th e preser va tion of this value would 
be achiev able only as a state of entropy, in 
which all of its artic u la tions would be 
equally ‘likely’ – meaning in the archi tec-
tonic context, which is concerned with 
criteria of adequacy rather than of happen-
ing, equally ‘adequat able’. Such an archi tec-
tonic state of entropy provides an atomism 
of value like the ther mo dy namic state of 
entropy (of the universe) provides an axio-
mat ism of forces. We can think of the 
dispos i tion of a work, its plan- ability, as 
such an entropic state, and we can call this 
‘archi tec tonic dispos i tion’, picking up on 
Alberti and Serlio, an ‘archi tec tonic model’. 
According to Vitruvius, the elements of this 
dispos i tion – quasi its vertices – must 
compre hend the full combin at or ial space of 
the total ity of possib il it ies the six element-
ary concepts are capable of determ in ing. 
‘Planning’ or ‘design’ – to use today’s 
concepts – can be read as a reduc tion of the 
combin at or ial poten ti ab il it ies, by conﬁ g ur-
ing the poten tial elements in an object ive 
way. 3 Vitruvius fore sees three dimen sions 
of concep tion which we know today as 
ground plan, elev a tion and perspect ive. 
He calls these three dimen sions of concep-
tion  ortho graphia (the natural, poten tial 
elements, in renais sance: elev a tion),  ichno-
graphia (the contrac tion of the poten ti-
abilit ies of these elements, in renais sance: 
ﬂ oor plan) and  sceno graphia (the oper a tion 
of contract ing, in renais sance: perspect ive 
or three- dimen sional plan). 
select ing one module from which the 
metrical unit for the overall taxa tion is to 
be derived in order to estab lish a singu lar 
work’s ‘ordin a tion’ by artic u lat ing and 
propor tion ing the members of the work; 
this idea of ordin a tion is analog ous to 
Vitruvius’ sugges tion that rather than ideas 
of the magnitudes and scales imper son-
ated by a partic u lar God, the human body 
can be refer ent to propor tion ate metrics in 
archi tec ture; (2)  disposi tio : regard ing the 
concep tion and dispos i tion of all the 
work’s elements in a gener al ized form in 
plans; (3)  eurythmia : the well- propor tioned 
overall appear ance of the partic u lar work; 
(4)  symmetria : for the harmony of the 
order with regard to the module from 
which its metrics is derived; (5)  decor or 
 propri ety: for custom iz a tion of the work 
accord ing to estab lished customs; and (6) 
 distri bu tio  (in Greek  oiko nomia ): for a 
distri bu tion of build ing mater i als and 
expenses adequate to the wealth and status 
of the customer. 
 Th e gener al iz a tion from local customs 
and the ethical/reli gious mean ings attemp-
ted by Vitruvius is so inter est ing because 
it proceeds in a manner of which I claim 
here that it  paral lels rather than imit ates 
or repro duces philo soph ical methods of 
gener al iz a tion and clas si ﬁ c a tion. Against 
this postu late there is a long tradi tion of 
Vitruvius’ recep tion; accord ing to this recep-
tion, archi tec ture, espe cially the public order 
it artic u lates in cities, was thought of as real-
iz ing an ideal of a cosmic order in the here 
and now of the world. Th e predom in ant 
critique on Vitruvius since the Renaissance 
is that his proposed methods operate with 
propor tion, without ever specify ing the 
attrib utes of the propor tions with precise 
ratios ( Fischer 2009 ). If, however, we return 
to his interest in the preser va tion of archi-
tec ture’s worth not through the discourse 
of aesthet ics, but through an approach 
informed by a climatic kind of ener get ics
and never self- evident, which he explored 
perhaps most prom in ently in his book 
 Le Système de Leibniz et ses Modèles 
Mathématiques (1968). Th e intro duc tion 
here is entitled ‘Ensembles théorique’ 
and Serres begins with the subchapter 
‘Scénographie, 
Ichnographie’. 
Scholars 
inter ested in Leibniz share a kind of embar-
rass ment, he begins. It concerns the irre-
con cil ab il ity of Leibniz’s rigor ously system-
atic thought, while this very system ati city 
doesn’t cease to refuse itself to rigor ous 
under stand ing. Leibniz presents his reader, 
as Serres puts it, 
 a poten tial ordon nance which lets itself 
be divined and which refuses itself 
cease lessly, a vague idea of a perceived 
coher ence seen a thou sand times in the 
mode of cava lier, and which hides its 
géometral, the sense of progress ing in a 
labyrinth of which one holds the thread 
but has no map. Oﬀ ered perspect ives, 
multi plied points of view, inﬁ n itely 
iter ated possib il it ies: it never seems that 
one could actu ally arrive at the exhaust ive 
limits of a synop tic, spread out, complete 
and actual plan.  
 Serres 1968 : 162 4 
 Serres here argues for a notion of the 
system which compre hends and organ izes 
all that obeys the prin ciple of iden tity, yet as 
an invari ant of which he assumes nothing 
else except that it be capable of absorb ing 
and integ rat ing all the vari ations that can 
actu ally be attrib uted to it; one can refer to 
such a notion of system only via math em at-
ical models, he main tains. Such models are 
not addressed as repres ent ing a reality (or 
ideal ity); they must be fash ioned in proﬁ le 
to each other rather than to a frame of 
refer ence. Th eir proﬁ les are to be worked 
out under the criteria of isomorph ism 
(equal ity with regard to their form al ity) 
between all of them, rather than correl a tion 
(linear hier arch ies of consequen ti al ity) or 
 If Vitruvius’ triad of archi tec tonic 
dispos i tion could be demon strated in a 
gener al ized form, then his archi tec tural 
theory might lend itself for devel op ing 
an inform a tion archi tec ton ics. It might 
provide orient a tion in how to gener al ize 
again from the numer ous spread ing out of 
discip lines that fall victim to increas ing 
local seclu sion, hermet icism and what 
could be called a certain banal ity of highly 
tech nical special iz a tion without systemic 
over view. Might the archi tec tonic categor-
ies that consti tute archi tec ture as a  profes-
sion (rather than as an art or as a science) 
provide a model of how to preserve the 
‘worth’ of the public order that is embod ied 
in know ledge? Th is, of course, is but a 
biased and spec u lat ive outlook. But here 
are some indexes of how such a re- 
interpret a tion of archi tec tonic dispos i tion 
could be started. 
 Th e notion of archi tec tonic dispos i tion 
has recently been picked up by Michel 
Serres, who argues exactly along these 
lines. Ichnography, scaeno graphy and 
ortho graphy are terms that allow him to 
theor ize a notion of system which contracts 
the ﬁ rst and the second laws of ther mo dy-
nam ics: its invari ant conser va tion (ﬁ rst 
law)  and its drift  towards dissol u tion 
(second law). ‘Physics describes a system,’ 
he argues, ‘but not one that is hier archic, 
deduct ive, or tightly ordered, as in the 
series of the Stoics: it is a set, a general equi-
lib rium, a balance sheet that takes account 
of the stochastic’ ( Serres 2000 : 128), as he 
puts it in  Th e Birth of Physics (1977), where 
he devel ops his notion of the  foedera 
naturae , the natural contract, in distinc tion 
to what he calls the  foedera fati , the contract 
of destiny. Serres’ interest in the contract, 
here and in other texts, can best be under-
stood as trans lat ing the dimen sion of 
archi tec tonic ‘ortho graphy’. Like this, one 
can decipher the same notion of system, 
always contrac ted to math em at ical models