ART

exists in our social and mater ial reality’ 
(Chan 2014 [2009]: 76). Chan’s critique of 
art that is bereft  of any autonomy which 
would enable it to reﬂ ect on (and resist) 
‘the global arrange ment to which life is 
increas ingly beholden for susten ance’ 
(ibid.) is heavily remin is cent of Adorno’s 
equally sombre (and prob lem atic) pursuit 
of the non- identical as a residue of aesthetic 
truth. Moreover, like Adorno, he refuses to 
bargain in the illu sion of a utopian rein ven-
tion of art’s situ ation through its expan sion. 
For even though art may not only be found 
in the places and insti tu tions proper to it 
(‘galler ies, nonproﬁ t spaces, museums, 
corpor ate lobbies, and such’), but every-
where else (‘on the sides of build ings, on 
aban doned grounds, in the sky, in make-
shift  kitchens, on river barges, at demon-
stra tions, in magazines, on human skin, 
as souven irs, and through speak ers and 
screens of every imagin able shape and size’ 
(ibid.: 82)), it merely expands and dissem-
in ates, Chan argues, as to stay func tional 
and oper at ive while aﬃ  rm ing the very 
total ity that grants it enti tle ment. Rather 
than multiply ing, rather than feeling every-
where at home, he concludes, art should 
become an agent of un- belong ing. 
 Th e tenet of art’s very home less ness and 
unten ab il ity, the demand of art’s refusal to 
signify is one of the most power ful (and 
certainly most diﬃ   cult) axioms in aesthetic 
theory. Where it is not exclus ively bound 
to an imper at ive to dissent, obli ging it 
to be ‘a form of expan ded ideo lo gical (and 
insti tu tional) critique’ ( O’Sullivan 2010 : 
197) or else ‘some kind of produc tion of 
signi ﬁ c a tion’ ( Nancy 2010 : 96), art may 
partake in an actu al iz a tion of other worlds, 
tempor al it ies and lives that do not neces-
sar ily corres pond to textual under stand ing 
and the routines of crit ical reading. 
Escaping repres ent a tion and its critique, 
however, usually comes with a price tag – 
 Th e crisis of modern ism embod ied in 
the expand ing universe(s) of contem por-
ary art that took root in the ‘larger modern-
ist sens ib il ity’ neces sit ated the fash ion ing 
of a subjectiv ity as speciﬁ c as possible: age, 
perspect ive, voice had to be forged into a 
crit ical iden tity prerequis ite of walking the 
expan ded ﬁ elds of post- modern ist art. But 
what happens to this ethico- polit ical ideal 
of the critic’s self once the situ ation gets 
completely out of control? Th e oft en 
lamen ted absence of the brand of strong 
criti cism cultiv ated by Krauss and her 
fellows in the 1970s and 1980s may be ulti-
mately ill- conceived; however, it points to a 
wide spread assump tion of power less ness 
with regard to today’s art. In fact, the entire 
ediﬁ ce of art’s concep tu al iz a tions seems 
on the verge of collapse and in dire need of 
an ethics that may be convert ible into an 
aesthet ics. Fantasies of escape and exodus, 
of reach ing contem por ary art’s ‘beyond’, 
of toppling indi vidual author ship in the 
name of parti cip a tion, of merging in activ-
ist polit ics, of invest ing in a ‘usolo gical 
turn’ (in order to revital ize art as a mode 
of oper a tion with eﬀ ects on the real; see 
 Wright 2013 ) abound. 
 Such visions resemble the well- known, 
albeit long- discarded (neo-)avant- gardist 
and product iv ist notions of the fusion 
of art and life, but their present urgency 
seems to stem from a some what diﬀ er ent 
analysis and exper i ence of crisis and 
despair. Among the possible infer ences to 
be made under the current predic a ment is 
the crit ical longing for an art that expli citly 
fails to be subsumed through the disar tic u-
la tion of any call to conform to the powers 
that be. Rendering the progress ive oppor-
tunism of the major ity of contem por ary 
art, artist Paul Chan projects a perfect 
negat ive picture of any future that art 
might have: ‘Art, by allying itself with 
contem por ary life, has found its purpose as 
a cunning system of medi ation, capable of
which are univer sal by default. In this 
philo soph ical context, aesthetic autonomy 
and art itself were largely to be under stood 
as attrib utes of human agency. However, 
the critique of aesthetic autonomy, the 
attack on the category of the artwork, the 
re- eval u ation of exper i ence and aﬀ ect, 
post- war art’s insti tu tional, geograph ical, 
tech no lo gical and epistem o lo gical expan-
sions, the discov ery of non- human actors 
and activ it ies in the making of art all 
amount to a situ ation in which the 
subjectiv it ies produced by and for art have 
changed for good. 
 See also Art in the Anthropocene; 
Contemporary, 
Th e; 
Gulf 
Labor; 
Metamodernism; Postimage; Posthuman 
Museum Practices.