ART IN THE ANTHROPOCENE

Garneau says, ‘What art does do – and what 
is diﬃ   cult to measure – is that it changes 
our indi vidual and collect ive imagin ar ies 
by particles, and these new pictures of the 
world can inﬂ u ence our beha vior’ (quoted 
in  Hill and McCall 2015 : ix). Th e arts 
are part of the emer gence of narrat ives 
about the ways in which we live in the 
world, narrat ives that can be damaging or 
vision ary, which can connect or dislo cate 
us from the earth. Th e fact that so much of 
Anthropocene discourse has been taken up 
in the arts merits more atten tion. 
 See also  Art; Anthropocene; Anthropocene 
Observatory; Ethereal Scent; Biological 
Arts/Living Arts; Ecohorror; Neuronal 
Aesthetics. 
 Heather Davis 
aﬀ ect ive and emotional trauma of climate 
change, dams and envir on mental pollu tion 
as it can hold together contra dic tions. We 
need modes of expres sion for the collect ive 
loss we are suﬀ er ing through and venues to 
express the emotional toll of living in a 
dimin ished world. Th is sense of multi pli-
city that is contained within art provides a 
way to sift  through the numer ous contra-
dic tions of our every day lives, to deal with 
diver gent and discon tinu ous scales of time, 
place and action. Art prac tice can also 
provide a space of propos i tions and future 
imagin ar ies, exem pli ﬁ ed by projects such 
as  Swale (2016) by Mary Mattingly, a ﬂ oat-
ing edible tree forest and self- contained 
ecosys tem on the Hudson River that resid-
ents and tour ists can visit and which 
provides a site for work shops and other 
forms of community engage ment. As David
the Human to involve non- human agents, 
through direct and exper i en tial engage-
ment ( Catts and Zurr 2014 ). 
 Biological Arts deals with the theory, 
prac tice, applic a tion and implic a tions of 
the life sciences; creat ing a plat form that 
actively engages in raising aware ness, by 
propos ing diﬀ er ent direc tions in which 
know ledge can be applied, and tech no logy 
can be employed. Th is can be seen as 
cultural scru tiny in action, artic u lat ing and 
subvert ing the ever- chan ging rela tions with 
life. Much of the work of biolo gical artists 
seems to be trans gress ive, tres passing into 
areas where ‘art should not go’. Yet it oft en 
does little more than cultur ally frame and 
artic u late mean ings to the manip u la tions 
of life that have become common place in 
the scientiﬁ c labor at ory. 
 Th is aesthet ic ally driven and confront-
ing treat ment of life by artists can create an 
uneasy feeling about the levels of manip u la-
tion oﬀ ered to living systems. Th is uneas i-
ness seems to stem from the fact that current 
cultural values and belief systems seem to 
be ill- prepared to deal with the consequences 
of applied know ledge in the life sciences. 
Life is going through some major trans-
form a tion, even if that might be more 
percep tual then actual. Th rough rigor ous, 
crit ical and indeed wondrous explor a tions 
in the life science labor at ory, Biological Arts 
begins a dialogue that engages with the 
extraordin ary poten tials and pitfalls of our 
new approaches to life itself. 
 However, Biological Arts is not a move-
ment with a coher ent mani festo; it is 
 B 
 BIOLOGICAL ARTS/LIVING ARTS  
 An artistic prac tice that involves the use of 
living biolo gical systems; in most cases the 
biolo gical systems are manip u lated and/or 
modi ﬁ ed by the artist using tech no lo gical/
engin eer ing biology as opposed to tradi-
tional modes of biolo gical inter ven tion. 
It is linked to the notion of emer ging 
know ledge and emer ging tech no lo gies. 
Biological Arts seems to work on the spec-
trum from the spec u lat ive to the actual, 
from the hyper bole to the disap point ing, 
form the techno- utopian to the contest-
able, while using living biolo gical systems 
as part of the process of art making. 1 
 Humans’ rela tion ship with (the idea 
of) life is going through some radical 
shift s; from the sub- molecu lar to the 
plan et ary, the cultural under stand ings of 
what life is and what we are doing to it 
are lagging behind the actu al it ies of 
scientiﬁ c 
and 
engin eer ing 
processes. 
From Synthetic Biology and Regenerative 
Medicine, through Neuroengineering and 
Soft  Robotics to Geoengineering – life 
is becom ing a tech no logy, a raw mater ial 
waiting to be engin eered; thus provid ing a 
new palette of artistic expres sion in which 
life is both the subject and object. Within 
the realms of science and engin eer ing, 
radical approaches to life, driven by mind-
sets of control, seem to be taken haphaz-
ardly; expos ing unin ten tional onto lo gical 
breaches, and calling for the urgent need 
for cultural and artistic scru tiny of the 
concept of life. Th is scru tiny goes beyond
BIOLOGICAL ARTS/LIVING ARTS 
forms of art, like Biological Arts, are 
ephem eral, tran si ent, in which by the end 
of the perform at ive dura tion they leave 
relics of remem brance. 
 Some may trace Biological Arts to 
Media Arts, where the artist’s engage ment 
with new tech no lo gies and their eﬀ ect on 
bodies and soci et ies are the point of 
interest. In the case of Biological Arts, 
these tech no lo gies are of the life sciences 
and there fore raise some unique consid er-
a tions, sens it iv it ies, ethics and applic a tions. 
Biological Arts is diﬀ er ent from Speculative 
Biology in that it works directly with living 
biolo gical systems. Avoiding the notion of 
the ‘spec u lat ive’ (with its capit al ist asso ci-
ations), it tends to align more with the 
notion of mater i al ity. Th erefore Biological 
Arts will be posi tioned in the spec trum of 
the actual, authen tic and contest able 
expres sions and further away from a 
ﬁ ction al ized and spec u lat ive approach. 
 Biological Arts is some times referred to 
as  bioart ; however, the term bioart seem to 
encom pass more than Biological Arts, in 
that bioart also includes, among other 
things, tradi tional art expres sions that are 
loosely dealing with the future of life, spec-
u lat ive Photoshopped images, and in some 
cases other branches of science not directly 
linked to biology. 
 See also Art; Art in the Anthro -
pocene; Transhumanism/Posthumanism; 
Hacking Habitat; Non-Human Agency; 
Technoanimalism; 
Speculative 
Post-
humanism; Vibrant Matter  
 Note 
 1. ‘It’s now a reality [that] artists are in the 
labs. Th ey are inten tion ally trans gress ing 
proced ures of repres ent a tion and meta-
phor, going beyond them to manip u late 
life itself. Biotechnology is no longer 
just a topic, but a tool, gener at ing green 
ﬂ uor es cent animals, wings for pigs, and 
merely an umbrella term to describe art 
that uses life and living systems as both its 
subject and object ( Yetisen et al. 2015 ). 
 Biological Arts has been seen as: 
 ● Critical/tactical media arts in which the 
artists actively critique, ques tion and 
prob lem at ize these devel op ments as 
well as the socio- economic contexts in 
which they operate ( da Costa and 
Philip 2008 ). 
 ● Promoting transhuman ism; diﬀ er ently 
to the posthu man approach, the trans-
human ist agenda serves the interest 
of the human (or some humans) in 
the quest to become a ‘better’ human 
and tran scend, through advance ment 
in science and tech no logy, into a seam-
less amal gam a tion of a tech no lo gical 
human. 
 ● Following a more tradi tional approach, 
some Biological artists follow the 
Formalist approach in which life 
becomes a raw mater ial for aesthetic 
expres sions 
concerns 
with 
form, 
perspect ive, colour compos i tion etc. 
that is supposedly devoid of socio- 
polit ical context. 
 ● Public engage ment with life science/
engin eer ing in which the artists are 
seen as either raising aware ness of 
techno- scientiﬁ c devel op ments, or as 
promot ing tech no lo gical devel op ments 
and suggest ing current and future scen-
arios. Some initi at ives have been 
actively trying to recruit artists to create 
public accept ance for tech no lo gies not 
yet real ized. 
 Biological arts has links to other forms of 
art which touch upon life – for example 
live art or perform ance art, where the 
human is the organ ism on display and 
serves as a subject and object; eco or envir-
on mental arts in which land scapes are 
being manip u lated and explored. All these
viotá (“βιοτά”) instead of zōē to the same 
eﬀ ect. 
Th e tenses of the verb zēō (ζήω-ῶ) are 
divided almost equally between zoë/zōē 
and bios/vios: from zōē come the Present 
zō, Simple Past ezōn, and the rare Future 
zēsō; while from vios come the common 
Future viōsomai, Aorist B eviōn, Present 
Perfect veviōka, Past Perfect eveviōkein.  
Zōthalmios and viothalmios in Pindar’s 
7th Olympian Ode (0.7.10) both mean the 
preservation of life, and the Sōsivios (life-
saving) incantation to Asklēpios is asking 
obviously for the saving of zoē (life itself) 
not of the accumulation of knowledge and 
experiences that the rigid distinction 
between zoë/bios that Giorgio Agamben 
reads in bios; see, for instance, the 
inscription Sōsivios Asklēpiō kai Ηhygeian 
euhēn, that appears on a votive oﬀ ering 
plaque exhibited in the New Acropolis 
Museum. Graﬃ  ti that appears scrawled on 
walls in Greece since the beginning of the 
ﬁ nancial crisis in 2010 demand “zōē, óhi 
epiviōsē” (life, not simple survival); modern 
and ancient Greek share the locution, 
descriptive of unspeakable suﬀ ering, such 
as when Sophocles has Ismene respond to 
Antigone’s question “how we are going to 
use up our life (alōmenai viou) trying to 
procure our hard-to-ﬁ nd food?” (ἀλώμεναι 
βίου δύσοιστον ἕξομεν τροφάν;) by 
conceding that their life (βίος) will be 
unlivable (ού βιωτός) aft er the death of 
their father (ὁ μέλλων βίος οὐ βιωτός). 
Sophocles here is certainly conﬂ ating the 
meaning of zōē as a biological process, 
with the meaning of bios as the cumulative 
quality of texture of that life. Th e binary 
negation of the form bios is found in other 
instances in Greek grammatology, such as 
in the atimōn tēn gynaikan kai ton vion 
aviōton paraskeuazōn (he humiliated the 
woman and created an unlivable life) in 
Aishinēs Against Timarchos (par 176); or 
ton dhe mohthēron kai aviōton autois 
sculp tures moulded in biore act ors or 
under the micro scope, and using  DNA 
itself as an artistic medium’ ( Hauser 
2003 : 3).    
 Oron Catts 
 BIOS  
Bios/ zoë [vios/zōē] is the foundational 
property of ánthrōpos, the site that both 
binds and delimits ánthrōpos to and from 
the rest of the other animals. Th e two 
forms of the term are far more similar in 
content and context, whether in Aristotle 
or anywhere else in Greek language, 
ancient or modern, than what has recently 
been made to be. Although not entirely 
conjoined, they are far from being distinct. 
Th e intricacies and intertwining of the two 
words are attested from the crudely 
grammatical langue, i.e. the structure of 
the verb zēō (ζήω-ῶ), to the most intricate 
parole that includes locutions such as vios 
zoēs (the life of life) in Plato’s Epinomis 
(982a), or the Homeric complex zōēs d’ 
agathon vion (hence the ﬁ ne vios of zoë, 
Odyssey O: 491). In general terms, it 
appears that zōē