BLUE HUMANITIES

Odysseus, Aeneas and Jonah to Ishmael, 
Robinson Crusoe and the story of the 
 Titanic . Especially during periods of mari-
time expan sion, from the Roman empire to 
the settle ment of the New World to Paciﬁ c 
island- hopping in the nine teenth century, 
ship wreck narrat ives provide stark visions 
of human ity caught between divine ﬁ at and 
the insuﬃ   cient promise of human agency. 
Th e chastened but neces sary tech nical 
labours of sailors in crisis repres ent valu able 
stories of humans surviv ing (some times) in 
the face of non- human powers. 
 Researching repres ent a tions of ship-
wreck in and beyond the early modern 
period has led me to deploy four subcat-
egor ies or inter pret ive clusters for human–
ocean encoun ters: wet glob al iz a tion, blue 
ecocriti cism, salt aesthet ics and ship wreck 
modern ity. Each of these double- barrelled 
phrases iden ti ﬁ es a traject ory for the blue 
human it ies in the future. New work in 
femin ist and ecoma ter i al ist models also 
provides rich seas to cross, as do the 
continu ing reson ance of such meta phors as 
the ‘ship of state’ and such geographic 
constructs as the World Ocean. In elab or at-
ing these four categor ies, I hope to identify 
currents for the blue human it ies rather 
than setting bound ar ies on the element 
that always over ﬂ ows all bound ar ies. 
 
 Wet Globalization: Twenty- ﬁ rst century 
responses to glob al iz a tion some times ﬂ y 
above the earth with passen ger planes. 
Blue human it ies schol ar ship recalls that 
histor ic ally and still today, the global 
economy ﬂ oats on the ocean. 
 
 Blue Ecocriticism: Th e sea’s over whelm ing 
pres ence in the natural envir on ment 
reminds us that this element, long margin-
al ized by green think ing, has the poten tial 
to revo lu tion ize ecolo gical thought in a 
post- sustain ab il ity context. 
 
 Th e long liter ary and cultural history of 
human entan gle ments with ocean butt up 
against what liter ary scholar Robert Foulke 
( 1997 ) has called the twen ti eth century’s 
turn away from mari time culture. While 
global capit al ism’s goods still ﬂ oat on the 
broad oceans, which Hegel called the 
native element of exchange and economic 
expan sion, the shift  from schoon ers to vast 
container ships has dehu man ized modern 
human ity’s rela tion ship with the ocean 
( Hegel 1967 [1821] : 151). In much of the 
twenty- ﬁ rst-century 
world, 
we 
have 
become communit ies of swim mers, not 
sailors. As the artist and ﬁ lm- maker Allan 
Sekula has power fully shown, the human–
ocean inter face has become increas ingly 
mech an ized 
and 
dehu man ized, 
even 
though robot- piloted vessels still trans port 
our economy’s life- blood across phys ical 
oceans ( Sekula 1996 ; Sekula and Burch 
ﬁ lm 2010). As the size of container ships 
grows along with their auto ma tion, fewer 
and fewer merchant marine sailors ply the 
oceans – though it seems note worthy that 
the emblem atic ﬁ gure of the pirate has not 
entirely disap peared. 
 My own work in the blue human it ies 
explores the posthu man envir on ment of 
the sea as a space espe cially valu able in our 
era of Anthropogenic climate change. Th e 
unstable and destruct ive envir on ment in 
which we live now increas ingly resembles 
dynamic sea rather than stable land. 
Agricultural and pastoral visions of 
sustain ab il ity and predict ab il ity are giving 
way to narrat ives of threat en ing and unre-
li able envir on ments. Th ese posthu man 
and post- sustain able narrat ives can be 
terri fy ing – but I suggest that oceanic liter-
at ure and culture can provide us with a 
rich cultural archive for raising new kinds 
of envir on mental ques tions. 
 No trope in the oceanic archive seems 
more reson ant than ship wreck, an ancient 
story of disor i ent a tion and disrup tion that
types of ‘somatic bodies politic’ (those 
whose aﬀ ect ive- cognit ive patterns and 
trig gers ﬁ t the func tional needs of the 
system) while those social systems or ‘civic 
bodies politic’ are them selves bodily in the 
sense of direct ing mater ial ﬂ ows. 
 Th e term was developed in dialogue with 
and can be seen as reson ant with numer ous 
scientiﬁ c and philo soph ical projects that 
can be asso ci ated with the ‘posthu man’. 
Among them would be the histor ical- 
libid inal mater i al ism of Deleuze and 
Guattari (1984, 1987), the enact ive biology 
and cognit ive science of Evan Th ompson 
( 2007 ), the cultural neuro plas ti city of Bruce 
Wexler ( 2006 ), the evol u tion ary tech ni city 
of Andy Clark ( 2003 ), the devel op mental 
systems theory of Susan Oyama ( 2000 ) and, 
aft er the fact, the radical black femin ism of 
Sylvia Wynter ( Weheliye 2014 ). 
 Bodies politic are embod ied, with indi-
vidu ated physiolo gical and psycho lo gical 
somatic dimen sions, and they are embed-
ded in multiple and over lap ping socio- 
polit ical rela tions with other bodies 
politic, rela tions which are them selves 
as well physiolo gical and psycho lo gical. 
We can thus distin guish compos i tional 
and temporal scales for bodies politic. 
Compositionally, we can distin guish ﬁ rst- 
and second- order bodies politic. First- 
order bodies politic are at the ‘personal’ 
scale, 
whereas 
second- order 
bodies 
politic can be at either the ‘group’ or ‘civic’ 
scale. Temporally, we can distin guish the 
short- term or ‘punc tual event’ scale, the 
mid- term or habit/train ing/devel op mental 
scale, and the long- term histor ical scale. It 
must be remembered, however, that these 
scales are analyt ical rather than concrete; 
all concrete bodies politic are imbric a tions 
of all compos i tional and temporal scales. 
 An indi vidual, then, is a ﬁ rst- order 
body politic, at once social and somatic, 
embed ded and embod ied, connec ted and 
 Salt Aesthetics: Th e disor i ent ing pres sure 
of the inhuman envir on ment of the sea has 
inﬂ u enced artists and poets from Homer 
to J. M. W. Turner and beyond. Salt water 
carries aesthetic force. 
 
 Shipwreck Modernity: From an oceanic 
perspect ive, the story of emer ging modern-
ity resembles a cata strophe- ridden epic of 
ocean- fuelled expan sion and its attend ant 
disasters. 1 
 
 Responding to the alien at ing pres sure of 
the ocean on human bodies and insti tu-
tions makes the blue human it ies a form of 
posthu man invest ig a tion. With cognates 
from cyborg studies, post- sustain ab il ity 
ecocriti cism, cata strophe studies and other 
discourses that separ ate humans from the 
spaces that comfort them, the oceanic turn 
in human it ies schol ar ship combines an 
ancient discourse that still thrives in 
contem por ary culture with a modern 
under stand ing of dynam ism and change 
in the rela tion ship between humans and 
their envir on ments. 
 See also Earth; Green/Environmental 
Humanities; Monster/Unhuman; Post-
disciplinarity. 
 Note 
 1. Th ese points are adapted from Steve 
Mentz,  Shipwreck Modernity: Ecologies of 
Globalization, 1550–1719 (Minneapolis: 
Minnesota University Press, 2015), 
xxix–xxx. 
 Steve Mentz 
 BODIES POLITIC  
 ‘Bodies politic’ ( Protevi 2009 ) imbric ate the 
social and the somatic: the repro duc tion of