BODIES POLITIC

and let live’. In most synchronic epis odes a 
quite precisely limited virtual reper toire of 
aﬀ ect ive cognit ive response is avail able (a 
limit a tion of all that the body could do, 
modelled as a regu larly recur ring attractor 
layout) and eﬃ  c a cious (although we can at 
any time be over whelmed by events that 
seem ‘sense less’ to us and that scramble our 
sense- making 
‘codes’). 
Diachronically, 
however, we can see changes at crit ical 
points as intens ive processes disrupt actual 
sets of habits; this can be modelled as the 
produc tion of new attractor layouts, and is 
exper i enced as psychic turmoil or excit ing 
novelty. During child hood, such trans itions 
in aﬀ ect ive cogni tion are well mapped by 
devel op mental psycho lo gists, while even 
in adult hood trau matic events or ﬂ ashes 
of insight can profoundly rearrange our 
habitual ways of making sense, that is, 
rearrange the virtual reper toire, modelled 
as the produc tion of new attractor layouts. 
 A 
second- order 
body 
politic 
is 
composed of indi vidu als who are them-
selves ﬁ rst- order bodies politic. Here we 
ﬁ nd the inter ac tion of the personal with 
the group compos i tional scale, where 
encoun ters can be one- oﬀ  occur rences or 
can be patterned and custom ary or even 
insti tu tion al ized (and thus operate at the 
border of group and civic). A second- order 
body politic is at minimum a couple, but 
can be larger; a second- order body politic 
has itself somatic and social aspects in both 
physiolo gical and psycho lo gical dimen-
sions. A second- order body politic has a 
physiology, as it regu lates mater ial ﬂ ows (1) 
among its members (the ﬁ rst- order bodies 
politic as the compon ents of its body) and 
(2) between itself (its soma as marked by its 
func tional border) and its milieu. For 
example, a second- order body politic might 
regu late the produc tion, distri bu tion and 
consump tion of food and drink: think of 
the way a family kitchen is a distri bu tion 
node for aﬀ ect ively charged mater ial ﬂ ows. 
indi vidu ated, in both physiolo gical and 
psycho lo gical dimen sions. Th is is the 
micro- level of compos i tional analysis, the 
personal. When viewed synchron ic ally (that 
is, on a relat ively short time scale), a ﬁ rst- 
order body politic is a dynamic physiolo-
gical system that regu lates its mater ial and 
ener getic ﬂ ows as they enter, circu late 
within and leave the socially embed ded yet 
indi vidu ated body to take part in the 
economy of higher- order bodies politic at 
the group and civic scales. Th ese dynamic 
physiolo gical patterns can be modelled as 
basins of attrac tion in the phase space of the 
body, as regions of its virtual, and are exper-
i enced as back ground aﬀ ects, as sharp or 
diﬀ use feel ings of well- being, unease or any 
of a variety of inter me di ate states. Events 
on the fast/personal scale are seen neur o lo-
gic ally as the form a tion of reson ant cell 
assem blies or  RCA s. Viewed diachron ic ally 
(that is, on a relat ively slow mid- term/
habitu ation or long- term/devel op mental 
time scale), the patterns of this physiolo-
gical ﬂ ow regu la tion coalesce through child-
 hood, change at crit ical points enter ing and 
leaving puberty, and oft en settle down into 
stable habits during adult hood. In other 
words, system patterns gradu ally crys tal lize 
or actu al ize as intens ive processes disrupt 
previ ous patterns; this can be modelled as 
the construc tion of new attractor layouts, 
and is exper i enced as being out of touch 
with your new body (the famous gawk i ness 
of adoles cents). 
 Psychologically, 
the 
ﬁ rst- order 
or 
personal body politic engages in aﬀ ect ive 
cogni tion, making sense of the situ ations 
in which its somatic life is lived in socio- 
polit ical embed ded ness. Th is making sense 
is profoundly embod ied; the body subject 
opens a sphere of compet ence within which 
things show up as ‘aﬀ ord ances’, as oppor-
tun it ies for engage ment, and other people 
show up as occa sions for social inter ac tion, 
as invit a tions, repul sions or a neutral ‘live
28 November 1947, Antonin Artaud 
declared war on the organs, intro du cing 
the idea of a body without organs 
that would be free from the captur ing 
conﬁ ne ments of auto matic reac tions and 
habitual patterns. In their co- authored 
philo sophy books  Anti-Oedipus (1972) 
and  A Th ousand Plateaus (1980), Gilles 
Deleuze and Félix Guattari propose 
Artaud’s body without organs as a concept 
to critique western Enlightenment forms 
of autonom ous subjectiv ity. While Deleuze 
and Guattari never expli citly relate the 
body without organs to the posthu man, 
the concept may be relev ant to under stand 
why N. Katherine Hayles in  How We 
Became Posthuman can conclude that ‘we 
have always been posthu man’ ( Hayles 
1999 : 291). 
 For Deleuze and Guattari the body 
without organs is an evolving concept. In 
 Anti-Oedipus it is intro duced in rela tion to 
the body of ‘the schizo’ that resists the 
habitual organ iz a tion of the body. Hence 
the refer ence to Artaud, who in all his 
deli ri ous and artistic expres sion points out 
that under neath the tradi tion ally coded 
body with an assigned place and role in 
society, under neath the organs, there is a 
chaotic, messy world full of intens ive 
poten ti al ity. Men, women, chil dren; all 
have their place in a social hier archy. 
Physical labour, bearing chil dren, sitting 
up straight in class; all have an orderly 
place for their organs. Th e (schiz oid) 
body without organs deﬁ es the social code 
and delib er ately ‘scrambles all the codes’ 
( Deleuze and Guattari 1972 : 15). In  A 
Th ousand Plateaus  Deleuze and Guattari 
invite us to ‘make a body without organs’, 
to exper i ment (artist ic ally, socially and 
philo soph ic ally) and ﬁ nd new ways of 
relat ing to the body: ‘Why not walk on 
your head, sing with your sinuses, see 
through your skin, breath with your belly?’ 
(1980: 151) Th ey elab or ate the liber at ing 
Th is regu la tion of group system dynam ics 
can be seen as construc tion of a virtual 
reper toire, modelled as the produc tion of 
an attractor layout, and aﬀ ect ively exper i-
enced as the back ground aﬀ ect or mood of 
the group. A second- order body politic can 
also be studied psycho lo gic ally, as it regu-
lates inter- somatic aﬀ ect ive cogni tion, the 
emotional and mean ing ful inter changes 
(1) among its members, and (2) between 
their collect ive aﬀ ect ive cogni tion and that 
of other bodies politic, at either personal, 
group or civic compos i tional scales. In 
other words, groups have char ac ter istic 
ways – a limited virtual reper toire – of 
making sense of what happens, on the basis 
of which decisions take place as actu al iz a-
tions or selec tions from that reper toire. 
Th ese decisions can be seen as chan nel ling 
toward an end state, modelled as the 
approach to an attractor in the group’s state 
space, and exper i enced as a spon tan eous 
agree ment in which the collect ive subject 
makes up its mind: ‘all of a sudden it 
dawned on all of us that this is what we had 
to do.’ In terms of its temporal scales, a 
short- term event for a second- order body 
politic is an encounter of ﬁ rst- order bodies 
politic. In the mid- term, we see repeated 
patterns of such encoun ters or subjec ti ﬁ c a-
tion prac tices, and in the long term, we see 
the becom ing- custom of such prac tices, 
their deep social embed ding. 
 See also Alienation; 
Body Without 
Organs; Geopolitics; Posthuman Rights; 
Posthuman Disability and DisHuman 
Studies; Trans- corpor eal ity. 
 John Protevi 
 BODY WITHOUT ORGANS  
 In ‘To Have Done with the Judgement 
of God’, a radio play broad cast on