BODY WITHOUT ORGANS

( Pisters 2014 ). 
 More speciﬁ c ally, based on these 
trans versal exten sions, the body without 
organs can also be product ive in the 
context of the tech no sphere. In her book 
 How We Became Posthuman , Hayles 
discusses how the model of the human 
since the Enlightenment has been subjec-
ted to alien a tion by cyber netic machines 
and arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence. Hayles brings 
together both scientiﬁ c theor ies and 
ﬁ ctional narrat ives of liter at ure that equally 
construct ideas about the posthu man in 
the computer age. She discov ers two 
tend en cies. On the one hand, there is an 
apoca lyptic narrat ive that indic ates the fear 
of the loss of human ity, loss of control and 
the dissol u tion of the human self. Th ese are 
the stories where tech no logy is conceived 
as separ ate from the human body: ‘Only 
if one thinks of the subject as an autonom-
ous self, inde pend ent of the envir on ment, 
is one likely to exper i ence the panic 
performed by Norbert Wiener’s  Cybernetics 
and Bernard Wolfe’s  Limbo ( Hayles 1999 : 
290). On the other hand, Hayles emphas-
izes (scientiﬁ c and imagin ary) stories that 
propose a contrast ing vision of the human 
in rela tion to the contem por ary techno- 
world: ‘When the human is seen as part of 
a distrib uted system.  . . it is not a ques tion 
of leaving the body behind but rather of 
extend ing embod ied aware ness in highly 
speciﬁ c, local and mater ial ways that would 
be impossible without elec tronic pros-
thesis’ (290–1). 
 Hayles’ concep tion of the posthu man is 
expli citly related to the artic u la tion of the 
human with intel li gent machines. However, 
by disen tangling certain assump tions 
about the human conceived as an inde-
pend ent entity, she opens up possib il it ies 
for the posthu man to survive in close 
circuits with other life forms, human, 
other wise embod ied and inor ganic, that 
strategies against the strat i fy ing regimes of 
the socially accep ted body, start ing with a 
call for doses of caution: the anor ectic 
body, the masochist body, the addicted 
body, the para noid body – they are all 
bodies without organs that demon strate 
that such resist ing strategies are not 
without danger and can turn out to be 
deadly. But there are no preset rules, except 
to be watch ful and wise, acknow ledging at 
the same time our fragil ity and need for 
freedom and the creation of new possib il-
it ies for life. 
 Th e body without organs is the sub- 
personal, not- yet-organized level of aﬀ ect-
ive qual it ies that allows new percep tions, 
new connec tions and new aﬀ ects. Because 
it dives below the categor ies and codes, the 
body without organs can make cross- 
cutting connec tions between the human 
and the non- human: mater i ally on the 
level of the combin a tion of human and 
animal  DNA , or on the aﬀ ect ive level of 
the prox im ity in move ment (speed and 
slow ness) in processes of becom ing- 
animal (e.g. prowl ing as in a becom ing- 
cat). So a second way of under stand ing the 
body without organs goes beyond the 
concept of the human body alto gether, 
when trans versal rela tions between species 
emerge. Th irdly, even further, the non- 
organic itself can be considered a body 
without organs. Th e earth is a body without 
organs, full of vibrant matter ( Bennett 
2010 ). Most funda ment ally, metal is a body 
without organs. Metal elements can be 
found in all human, animal and inor ganic 
matter. In its prim or dial and trans form at-
ive quality, metal is even the prime 
conductor of all matter, indic at ing an 
imman ent power of corpor eal ity in all 
matter ( Deleuze and Guattari 1980 : 411). 
Th ese in- human and inhuman exten sions 
of the body, beneath the organs and 
beyond human corpor eal ity and into the 
geology of the earth, make the body
to all other entit ies on the earth, the body 
without organs proposes indeed that we 
have always been posthu man. 
 See 
also 
Alienation; 
 AI 
(Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence); Earth; In-Human the; In/
Human; Contemporary, the; Otherwise 
Embodied Others. 
 Patricia Pisters 
we depend on. Th e body without organs 
suggests that we did not have to wait for 
pros thetic machines, exten sions of men by 
tech no logy, to under stand that the ‘scram-
bling of the codes’ is ﬁ rst and for all 
connec ted to a desire and funda mental 
need to deliver our auto matic reac tions 
and habitual self- contained forms of 
subjectiv ity. In acknow ledging our deep 
and ever- chan ging trans versal connec tions
century, includ ing ‘how camp spaces are 
currently discussed, imaged and construc-
ted’ (2009: 2). 
 Central to any discus sion, imagin ing 
and construc tion of the camp is a notion of 
human ity that rests on the possib il ity of 
contain ing the inhuman. Speciﬁ cally, we 
have to ask  who are the resid ents of camps, 
 who constructs the camp and  how are its 
resid ents, and the camp itself, imagined? Is 
it possible to reima gine the space of the 
camp in the name of  other histor ies – 
Romani histor ies, for one, and histor ies of 
encamp ment that can be posited as 
critique, as future, as possib il ity? If the 
Paris Commune was a form of encamp-
ment, and we take seri ously the polit ical 
prac tices of the Romani camp, how do we 
then under stand the states of excep tion 
that mark the concen tra tion camp and the 
refugee camp? Th ese multiple, contra dict-
ory mean ings and prac tices of the camp 
are construc ted through and formed by 
categor ies and notions of in/human ity. 
I would push us to take these ques tions 
seri ously – to claim this continuum of 
mean ings – as we enter into a consid er a-
tion of the polit ics and prac tices of the 
posthu man. 
 In order to under stand the camp as a 
tempor ary space, marked, at the same time, 
as a ﬁ gur at ively perman ent constitutive 
outside, we come to the deﬁ n i tion of the 
camp put forth by Giorgio Agamben in 
 Homo Sacer , as the  nomos of the modern. 
Agamben argues: 
 C 
 CAMP  
 Th e notion of the camp presents both 
some resid ual human ist features and 
distinct posthu man elements. It raises 
imper at ively the ques tion of the rela tion-
ship between posthu man ism and the 
inhuman aspects of the contem por ary 
world order. Th e origins of the word ‘camp’, 
accord ing to the  Oxford English Dictionary 
( OED ) (1989: 809), are milit ary, and the 
ﬁ rst deﬁ n i tion is ‘Martial contest, combat, 
ﬁ ght, battle, war’. Th e idea of camp as a site 
of battle is one that I want to keep constant, 
precisely because I see the camp as a site of 
critique, resist ance, oppos i tion and, in the 
end, combat. 
 Th e  OED has more than two pages 
deﬁ n ing camp, begin ning with the milit ary 
and trans fer ring to ‘the tempor ary quar-
ters, formed by tents, vehicles or other 
port able, impro vised means of shelter, 
occu pied by a body of nomads or men on 
the march, by trav el lers, gipsies [ sic ], 
compan ies of sports man, lumber man, 
ﬁ eld- preach ers and their audi ences, or 
parties “camping out”; an encamp ment.’ By 
the twen ti eth century, such ‘tempor ary 
quar ters’ included ‘quar ters for the accom-
mod a tion for detained or interned persons, 
as in  concen tra tion camp ’. As Charlie Haley 
has argued, ‘deﬁ n ing the camp is a central 
problem of our contem por ary moment’ 
(2009: 1), and he has metic u lously worked 
to docu ment the spaces and ideas of the 
camp at the begin ning of the twenty- ﬁ rst
and signi ﬁ c a tions, from the milit ary to the 
tempor ary to the site of intern ment or 
concen tra tion, from prac tices of leisure 
and holiday to those of bodily or aﬀ ect ive 
excess. In this way, the state of excep tion 
produced by the camp can be seen, also, as 
a site of possib il ity, where the camp and 
prac tices of encamp ment can be taken up 
as critique, as resist ance, as oppos i tion, as 
polit ics and as archive. Hannah Arendt, in 
‘We Refugees’, claims the refugee as the 
agent of a new polit ical posi tion, arguing: 
‘refugees driven from country to country 
repres ent the vanguard of their peoples – if 
they keep their iden tity’ (1943: 119). 
Arendt’s argu ment in that last clause ‘if 
they keep their iden tity’ was a call to claim 
refugee status; the status, as she says earlier 
in the essay, of the ‘so- called  schnor rer ’, or 
beggar, as a call to solid ar ity and a new 
under stand ing of belong ing, rather than 
ﬁ ght ing ‘like madmen for private exist-
ences and indi vidual destinies’ (114). 
 In the current moment, it is crucial that 
we claim the camp – from the  lager to the 
refugee camp, from the Romani encamp-
ment to the mahala, from the slum to the 
tower block. Such claim ing can be the 
basis for a new polit ics, one that takes 
seri ously the connec tions and intimacies 
that make up the human and non- human; 
the rela tion of human to animal, to mater ial 
objects and product ive prac tices, to the 
Commons and the larger world. Claiming 
the camp means taking up a polit ical 
economy that is not based on the Lockean 
ﬁ du ciary trust, on owner ship and enclos-
ure. Rather, we can take up new ques tions of 
tempor al ity and tempor ar i ness, useful ness 
and prac tice, common space and common 
sites, community form a tions and serious 
engage ments with (gendered, racial ized, 
classed, sexual, embod ied) diﬀ er ence. 
 Claiming the camp for me, as a Romani 
woman, means, on the one hand, claim ing 
  But what is ﬁ rst of all taken into the 
juridical order is the state of excep tion 
itself. Insofar as the state of excep tion is 
‘willed’, it inaug ur ates a new juridico- 
polit ical paradigm in which the norm 
becomes indis tin guish able from the 
excep tion. Th e camp is thus the struc ture 
in which the state of excep tion – the 
possib il ity of decid ing on which founds 
sover eign power – is real ized normally. 
 1998: 96–7 
 Th is new juridico- polit ical paradigm has 
been produced through the concen tra tion 
camp, the refugee camp, the migrant camp, 
the Romani camp and the prison camp at 
Guantánamo Bay, which itself has existed 
as a space of excep tion created in the wake 
of the War of 1898 – a  US Naval Base on 
Cuban soil – and in its subsequent iter a-
tions as a contain ment camp for Haitians in 
the 1990s and an extra ter rit orial, extraju di-
cial prison in the wake of 9/11. Camps have 
not simply been produced and main tained 
as states of excep tion, they have grown and 
spread glob ally. Camps exist in cities and 
spaces from Kenya to Calais, from Dhaka to 
Turkey, and from Jordan to Chennai. Recent 
history has seen Second World War- era 
concen tra tion camps, former mass murder 
sites – includ ing Dachau in Germany and 
Sajmište in Serbia – turned into refugee 
camps. Th us the state of excep tion has 
achieved spatial domin ance, with large 
areas of the world main tain ing sover eign 
states of excep tion for the  longue- durée , as 
sites of death and of what Agamben has 
called ‘bare life’. Camps, spread across 
Europe, Africa, the Americas and Asia, have 
repro duced the state of excep tion on such 
a large scale that, we could argue, necro pol-
it ics, as conceived by Achille Mbembe 
( 2003 ), has, in fact, triumphed over biopol-
it ics to become the domin ant product ive 
machinery of sover eignty. 
 Th e space of encamp ment, and the 
meaning of the camp, has also been a site