CAPITALOCENE AND CHTHULUCENE

chthonic ones. Th e scan dals of times called 
the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene 
are the latest and most danger ous of these 
exterm in at ing forces, these Singularities 
dealing out double death. Living- with and 
dying- with each other potently in the 
Chthulucene can be a ﬁ erce reply to the 
dictates of both Anthropos and Capital in 
the exterm in a tion ist times of the Moderns. 
It turns out that the chthonic ones are not 
dead; they writhe and slither within all of 
earth. Like Medusa, they are mortal and on 
the move. Like the octopuses, squid and 
cuttle ﬁ sh appre ci ated in ﬁ ft h- century  BCE 
Greece, the chthonic ones are crit ters of 
aporia. Th ey secrete inky darkest night; 
they are artis ans of disguise; they are 
relent lessly poly morphic; they entangle the 
world in their numer ous tube- feet-lined, 
stinger- endowed tentacles. 7 Th e chthonic 
ones are spiders of the sea; they are pred at-
ors; they are not exterm in at ors. 
 We need a name for the dynamic 
ongoing sym- chthonic forces and powers 
of which people as humus are a part, within 
which ongo ing ness is at stake. Ongoingness 
is not futur ism; ongo ing ness is full of 
continu it ies, discon tinu it ies and surprises. 
Maybe, but only maybe, and only with 
intense commit ment and collab or at ive 
work and play with other earth lings, ﬂ our-
ish ing for rich multis pe cies assemblages 
that include human people will be possible. 
I am calling all this the Chthulucene – past, 
present and to come. Th ese real and 
possible timespaces are not named aft er  SF 
writer H. P. Lovecraft ’s miso gyn ist racial- 
night mare monster Cthulhu (note the 
spelling diﬀ er ence), but rather aft er the 
diverse earth- wide tentacu lar powers and 
forces and collec ted things with names like 
Naga, Gaia, Tangaroa (burst from water- 
full Papa), Terra, Haniyasu- hime, Spider 
Woman, Pachamama, Oya, Gorgo, Raven, 
A’akuluujjusi and many many more. ‘My’ 
 ‘Chthulucene’ is a simple word. It is a 
compound of two Greek roots ( khthôn and 
 kainos ) that together name a kind of time-
place for learn ing to stay with the trouble 
of living and dying in response- ability on 
a damaged earth. Kainos means now, a 
time of begin nings, a time for ongoing, 
for fresh ness. Nothing in kainos must 
mean conven tional pasts, presents or 
futures. Th ick times have many shapes; 
arrows entangle, double back on them-
selves, prolif er ate and lead astray; times are 
bump tious mater i al it ies. Besides all that, 
there is nothing in times of begin nings 
that insists on wiping out what has come 
before, or, indeed, wiping out what comes 
aft er. Kainos can be full of inher it ances, 
of remem ber ing, and full of comings, of 
nurtur ing what might still be, as well as 
noti cing what still is. Resonating in 
sympoi etic complex ity, kainos plucks the 
threads of thick, ongoing pres ence, with 
stringy hyphae infus ing all sorts of tempor-
al it ies and mater i al it ies. 
 Chthonic ones are beings of the earth, 
both 
ancient 
and 
up- to-the- minute. 
Chthonic ones are replete with tentacles, 
feelers, digits, cords, whip tails, spider legs 
and very unruly hair. Chthonic ones romp 
in multi- critter humus but have little 
patience 
with 
sky- gazing 
anthro pos. 
Chthonic ones are monsters in the best 
sense; they demon strate and perform the 
mater ial mean ing ful ness of earth processes 
and crit ters. Th ey also demon strate and 
perform consequences. Chthonic ones are 
not safe; they have no truck with ideo-
logues; they belong to no one; they writhe 
and luxuri ate in mani fold forms and mani-
fold names in all the airs, waters and places 
of earth. Th ey make and unmake; they are 
made and unmade. Th ey are who are; they 
are what are. Th ey do not do ‘I’ very well; 
they are sym- poietic, not auto- poietic. No 
wonder the world’s great mono the isms in 
both reli gious and secular guises have tried
systems from 1750 to the present. Like all 
such global aggreg ates, the data mask 
vast and diverse inequal it ies and also 
threaten to mystify the sympoi etic 
natural- tech nical processes for making 
such data, as well as making such 
inequal it ies and onto lo gical homo gen iz-
a tions. Still, the strik ing shared inﬂ ec tion 
points around 1950 of so many hetero-
gen eous expo nen tial growth curves 
(human popu la tion, species extinc tions, 
use of paper, carbon emis sions, metals 
extrac tion, indus trial animal produc tion, 
forced and free human migra tions, etc. 
etc.) cry out for situ ated histor ical 
analysis of webbed processes, and not for 
enthralled appeals to the math em at ics of 
expo nen tial growth curves as if they 
described natural laws and neces sary 
direc tions of time. 
 4. 
For his ﬁ rst widely avail able Capitalocene 
argu ment, see Jason Moore, ‘Anthropo-
cene, Capitalocene, and the Myth of 
Industrialization’, 
 https://jason w moore.
wordpress.com/2013/06/16/anthropo
cene- capitalocene-the- myth-of- 
industrial iz a tion/ , 16 June 2013, and ‘Th e 
Capitalocene, Part 1: On the Nature and 
Origins of Our Ecological Crisis’,  http://
www.jason w moore.com/uploads/The_
Capitalocene__Part_I__June_2014.pdf, 
2015 [accessed 15 March 2016].  
 5. Scott Gilbert pointed out that the 
Anthropocene (and Plantationocene) 
should be considered a bound ary event 
like the K-Pg bound ary, not an epoch. 
See Donna Haraway, Noboru Ishikawa, 
Scott F. Gilbert, Kenneth Olwig, Anna L. 
Tsing and Nils Bubandt, ‘Anthropologists 
Are Talking – About the Anthropocene’, 
 Ethnos , 81(4): 1–30, 2015. As far as I 
know, this conver sa tion is the ﬁ rst place 
the term Plantationocene appeared 
(p. 22). 
 6. Refuge and resur gence are developed in 
Anna Tsing,  Th e Mushroom at the End of 
Chthulucene, even burdened with its prob-
lem atic 
Greek- ish 
tendrils, 
entangles 
myriad tempor al it ies and spati al it ies and 
myriad intra- active entit ies- in-assemblages 
– includ ing the more- than-human, other- 
than-human, inhuman and human- as-
humus. Even rendered in an American 
English- language text like this one, Naga, 
Gaia, Tangaroa, Medusa, Spider Woman 
and all their kin are some of the many 
thou sand names proper to a vein of  SF that 
Lovecraft  could not have imagined or 
embraced – namely the webs of spec u lat ive 
fabu la tion, spec u lat ive femin ism, science 
ﬁ ction and scientiﬁ c fact, so far. 8   
 We need ugly words like Anthropocene 
and Capitalocene to do needed critique; 
we need the snakey no- name/thou sand- 
name ones for actual living and dying as 
earth lings. It matters which stories tell 
stories, which concepts think concepts. 
Mathematically, visu ally and narrat ively, it 
matters which ﬁ gures ﬁ gure ﬁ gures, which 
systems system at ize systems. 9 
 See 
also 
Anthropocene; 
Epigenetic 
Landscape; Expulsions; Extinction; Gulf 
Labor; Kin; Vibrant Matter; Survival; 
Posthuman Critical Th eory.
COMMONS, THE 
under stood as one such concept, as a 
some thing – rela tion, aﬀ ect, space, time, 
lack – that is shared by all, used by all, and 
accounts for all things in/of/on the 
common(s). Th e commons is a constant 
emer gence of common social, economic 
and envir on mental rela tions and prac tices. 
Th ey are spaces of exper i ment a tion, for 
both theor iz ing and prac tising, provid ing a 
lens for critique and aﬃ  rm a tion, a method 
for resist ance and creation. Th ey might be 
purely aﬀ ect ive, tethered to a speciﬁ c loca-
tion, or an unpre dict able entangling of 
both. Perhaps they are a riot, a party, a free 
space, an invis ible space, a non- space, a 
common place. Th e inter pret a tion of the 
commons as such ﬁ nds further support in 
Deleuze’s explic a tion of philo soph ical 
produc tion; he clari ﬁ es that while some 
concepts require special ized, extraordin-
ary or aﬀ ect ively charged words, ‘others 
make do with an ordin ary, every day word 
that is ﬁ lled with harmon ics so distant that 
it risks being imper cept ible to a nonphilo-
soph ical ear’ ( Deleuze 1994 : 7–8). Suﬃ  ce 
to say, it would be hard to ﬁ nd a more 
appar ently mundane word that ‘common’, 
yet this simpli city belies the contra dict ory, 
complex, 
multiple 
and 
ever- evolving 
praxes that denote the commons of the 
past and present. 
 Th e commons of advanced capit al ism 
are myriad, multiple, contra dict ory and, at 
times, imper cept ible. Th ey have taken 
shape as digital ( Terranova 2004 ), cultural 
( Lessig 2002 ), intel lec tual ( Moten and 
Harney 2013 ), aesthetic ( Moten 2003 ), 
histor ical ( Linebaugh 2014 ), envir on-
mental ( Shiva 1997 ), domestic ( Federici 
2012 ) and urban ( Harvey 2012 ) commons. 
As a prac tice of communal manage ment of 
resource access, the commons determ ines 
trans versal rela tions between all living 
beings and their common envir on ment. 
With thou sands of years of prac tical know-
ledge, the concept of the commons can 
the World: On the Possibility of Life in 
Capitalist Ruins (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2015). 
 7. Marcel 
Detienne 
and 
Jean-Pierre 
Vernant,  Les ruses de l’intelligence: la 
mètis des Grecs (Paris: Flammarion et 
Cie, 1974). Th e Titan goddess Metis is of 
an earlier, more tangled age than Zeus 
and his siblings. Despite eﬀ orts to build 
her into Olympiad gene a lo gies by marry-
ing her to Zeus, in my stories of the 
Chthulucene, Metis remains true to her 
earth- wide tentacu lar kin. 
  8. Os Mil Nomes de Gaia/the Th ousand 
Names of Gaia was the gener at ive inter-
na tional 
confer ence 
organ ized 
by 
Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, Déborah 
Danowski and their collab or at ors in 
2014 in Rio de Janeiro. See Haraway, 
‘Entrevista,’ by Skype, 21 August 2014, 
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
1x0ox UHO lA8 . For all the videos from 
Th e Th ousand Names of Gaia/Os Mil 
Nomes, see  https://www.youtube.com/c/
osmil nomes de gaia/videos [accessed 17 
December 2015]. 
 9. Th is gloss ary entry relies heavily on 
Donna J. Haraway,  Staying with the 
Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene 
(Durham,  NC : Duke University Press 
Books, 2016). 
 Donna Haraway 
 COMMONS, THE  
 In  What is Philosophy? Deleuze and 
Guattari argue a philo soph ical praxis 
based on the produc tion of concepts. Such 
concepts, they contend, are inter twined 
with the prob lem atic forces they are 
created to address, ‘without which they 
would have no meaning and which can 
them selves only be isol ated or under stood 
as their solu tion emerges’ ( Deleuze and 
Guattari 1994 : 16). Th e commons can be
COMMONS, THE