CHTHULUCENE

We are not posthu man; we are compost. 
We are not homo; we are humus. We are 
terran; we are earth lings; we are many; we 
are inde term in ate. We bleed into each 
other in chaotic ﬂ uid extra vag ance. We eat 
our own snakey tails in sympoi etic whorls 
to gener ate poly morphic ongo ing ness; we 
are enmeshed with the ouroboroi of 
diverse inter laced neth er worlds. We are 
chthonic, of and for the earth, of and for its 
unﬁ n ished times. We live and die in its 
ruins. We tunnel in the ruins to germin ate 
the geno cide against Roma and Sinti, 
claim ing our exist ence in the  lagers , the 
exterm in a tion camps set up by the Nazis 
and their allies to destroy our people and 
our history. It means coming to a recog ni-
tion of that history, of those who were 
murdered and those who survived, and of 
the gener a tions who have come aft er, still 
marked by the loss of our people, our 
history, our place in the world. On the 
other hand, it means taking the Romani 
camp – in its old and new form a tions – as 
one of the means of our survival and one 
of the possib il it ies of our dignity, our 
diﬀ er ence, our polit ics and our community, 
that has been the site of our archive and 
our history. Elsewhere, I have written 
about the camp as a living thing, as the site 
of decol on iz a tion; it can only become such 
if we claim it as our history, our archive, 
our living present ( Brooks 2013 : 2). 
 Again, we can draw from Agamben, but 
this time to take up the camp as possib il ity, 
as the site of another polit ics: 
  It is even possible that, if we want to be 
equal to the abso lutely new tasks ahead, 
we will have to abandon decidedly, 
without reser va tion, the funda mental 
concepts through which we have so far 
repres en ted the subjects of the polit ical 
(Man, the Citizen and its rights, but also 
the sover eign people, the worker, and so 
forth) and build our polit ical philo sophy 
anew start ing from the one and only 
ﬁ gure of the refugee. 
 Agamben 2000 : 16.7 
 Th is concep tion of the refugee is one basis 
upon which we can build a new polit ical 
philo sophy, but, for me, it is the idea of the 
camp that opens up new polit ical possib il-
ity. Paul Gilroy ( 2004 : 16) argues for a 
‘plan et ary human ism’ based on ideas of 
decol on iz a tion put forth by Fanon and 
Césaire, and asks us to move beyond the 
‘camps’ of race, the nation- state and
to think with. Moore himself ﬁ rst heard 
the term ‘Capitalocene’ in 2009 in a seminar 
in Lund, Sweden, when then gradu ate 
student Andreas Malm proposed it. In an 
urgent histor ical conjunc ture, words- to-
think- with pop out all at once from many 
bubbling cauldrons because we all feel the 
need for better netbags to collect up the 
stuﬀ  crying out for atten tion. 4   
 However, 
the 
Anthropocene 
or 
Capitalocene are perhaps really more 
bound ary events than epochs, like the 
K-Pg bound ary between the Cretaceous 
and the Paleogene. 5 Th e Anthropocene 
and Capitalocene mark severe discon tinu-
it ies; what comes aft er will not be like what 
came before. Th e scale of destruc tion 
wreaked in the Anthropocene, in the 
Capitalocene, has consequences. Th ere will 
be no  status quo ante . Loss is real and 
ongoing. Mourning is required, and it is 
and will be hard. Th e bound ary that is the 
Anthropocene/Capitalocene means many 
things, includ ing that immense, irre vers-
ible and unequally borne destruc tion is 
really in train, not only for the eleven 
billion or so people who will be on earth 
near the end of the twenty- ﬁ rst century, 
but for myriads of other crit ters too. (Th e 
incom pre hens ible but sober number of 
around eleven billion people will only hold 
if current world wide birth rates of human 
babies remain low; if they rise again, all 
bets are oﬀ . Anti- racist, anti- imper i al ist 
femin ists stopped talking about this; 
shame on us.) Th e edge of extinc tion is not 
just a meta phor; system collapse is not a 
thriller. Ask any refugee of any species. 
Our job is to make the Anthropocene and 
Capitalocene as short and thin as possible 
and to cultiv ate with each other in every 
way imagin able epochs to come that can 
replen ish refuge. 6 
 
 Right now, the earth is full of refugees, 
human and not, without refuge. 
 
in the seams. We can yet be resur gent. 
Th ere may still be time. Composting is so 
hot. 1 
 Th e outrages merit ing names like 
Anthropocene or Capitalocene are about 
socio- ecolo gic ally, 
histor ic ally 
situ ated 
human beings (not human kind all the time 
every where) destroy ing places and times 
of refuge for people and other crit ters. 
Th e Anthropocene and the Capitalocene 
desig nate double death, the killing of the 
condi tions of ongo ing ness. 2 Th ese are 
appro pri ately ugly names for unpre ced-
entedly destruct ive webs of systemic 
processes. Th eir consequences, their mater-
i al it ies, are already etched into the rocks, 
airs, waters and ﬂ esh of terrans, in chem ical 
and nuclear signa tures, in heat- trap ping 
gasses, in hot acid seas. Capitalocene is one 
of those neces sary but insuﬃ   cient words 
that pop into one’s mouth unbid den. 
Unhappy with the false and arrog ant 
human ist univer sal ism of Anthropocene, I 
started lectur ing about the histor ical 
extrac tion ism and extinc tion ism of the 
Capitalocene (and of the Plantationocene, 
that name for processes for making wealth 
through radical simpli ﬁ c a tion, rooted in 
global trans port a tions of peoples, plants, 
animals and microbes and in slavery, colo-
ni al ism, 
hetero- norm at ive 
famili al ism, 
racism and other forced systems of produc-
tion and repro duc tion, all of which made 
the great accel er a tions of the Capitalocene 
possible). 3 But no one invents terms like 
Capitalocene  de novo ; notice how many 
people propose similar import ant terms 
at the same time. We lust for names to 
desig nate a shared, intol er able and ﬂ atly 
unne ces sary condi tion. Th e estab lished dis-
 order is not neces sary; how many times 
and in how many ways must we learn 
to notice this fact? Not only was ‘my’ 
Capitalocene part of a cat’s cradle game of 
inven tion, as always, but Jason Moore had 
already developed compel ling argu ments