COMPUTATIONAL TURN

logic of programmed truths, but on the 
capa cit ies of auto mated systems to retrieve 
(and thus to directly act upon) large 
amounts of inform a tion. With the inter act-
ive machine, the compu ta tional methods 
of know ledge have also radic ally changed 
and involve no longer programmed, but 
program mable truths stem ming from 
the capa cit ies of algorithms to estab lish 
infer ence from the retrieval, correl a tion 
and clas si ﬁ c a tion of data. As know ledge 
becomes compu ta tion ally processed by 
means of algorithmic proced ures of 
search ing and sorting data, algorithmic 
auto ma tion has become central to cultural 
produc tion (through algorithmic- oriented 
search and analysis of computer simu la-
tions), to the polit ical machine of 
governance (through algorithmic and 
data mining systems of secur ity and 
control) and to the nature of machine 
think ing. More expli citly than ever, 
the compu ta tional turn is raising the 
ques tion of what and who is produ cing 
know ledge. 
 It is possible to distin guish three distinct 
orders of know ledge (cultural produc tion, 
governance and thought itself), which have 
become entangled with the twenty- ﬁ rst-
century form of compu ta tional auto ma-
tion. Th e ﬁ rst order concerns how the 
compu ta tional infra struc ture is trans form-
ing the very task of know ledge produc tion 
within the human it ies (an algorithmic- 
driven produc tion of culture). Th e second 
concerns the way auto nomic machines, 
data scrap ing and data mining tech niques 
show how the governance of popu la tions 
is increas ingly tending towards the 
meta- governance of data, involving the 
algorithmic embed ding of the social body 
within the body of data. Th e third order 
concerns the compu ta tion of thought itself; 
not the imit a tion of think ing, but whether 
compu ta tion is learn ing  how to elab or ate 
concepts through social, linguistic and 
Th is symbolic order of know ledge was not 
repres en ted in the form of the math em at-
ical model of a  calcu lus rati ocin ator , but 
more import antly was a vision of the auto-
mated capa cit ies to rational think ing 
insofar as comput ing could be embed ded 
in machines that could perform calcu lus. 
Leibniz’s early modern project of comput-
ing know ledge foresaw the link between 
discret iz a tion and auto ma tion and the 
emer gence of a univer sal machine that 
could store, processes and trans mit know-
ledge by means of a binary logic. Since 
then, the turn to compu ta tion has envis-
aged the possib il ity of invent ing a general 
system of order ing, clas si fy ing, compress-
ing and correl at ing data: a tran scend ental 
mode of think ing. Only aft er two centur-
ies, with the inven tion or the thought 
exper i ment of the Turing Machine, could 
the auto ma tion of know ledge ﬁ nally 
become more than a mere recom bin a tion 
of discrete bits. Th e method of discret iz a-
tion no longer has the task of break ing 
down complex ity into ﬁ nite units, but 
instead acquires the power of elab or at ing 
inform a tion to search for problem- solving 
solu tions. From crunch ing numbers to the 
auto ma tion of problem- solving, the Turing 
Machine intro duced a radical discov ery 
in compu ta tion, namely the oper at ive 
func tion or the perform at ive activ ity of 
inform a tion. With the Turing Machine, 
know ledge fully enters the modern infra-
struc ture of compu ta tional axio mat ics or 
truth contain ing logic absorb ing social 
activ it ies of inform a tion commu nic a tion 
and trans mis sion. Th e consequences of 
this new form of auto ma tion re- write the 
history of Western culture through the 
indus trial machine of the assembly line 
and Taylorist methods of produc tion. By 
the late 1980s, the Turing Machine had 
developed to become inter act ive and 
dialo gic ally respons ive to the envir on-
ment; no longer based on the deduct ive
vari ations. Th e shift  towards a non- rational 
model of power has meant that governance 
has acquired a systemic func tion al ity, 
which is inclus ive of excep tions as these 
become captured by the perform at ive 
produc tion of norms, emer ging as and 
when these are needed. No longer depend-
ent on  a priori axio mat ics, but on the inde-
term in acy of excep tions, the system atic 
quality of governance works to predict 
erratic conducts and to stat ist ic ally 
produce truths assembled by the data- 
driven compu ta tional machine. Here 
predic tion involves forward- looking eval-
u ation of data (the compu ta tional strat i ﬁ  -
c a tion of popu la tion within the fractal 
matrix of data, metadata, big data, soft  ware 
programs, algorithmic processing) estab-
lish ing a conduct of conduct, or regimes of 
intel li gib il ity run by machine. 
 From this stand point, not univer sal 
truths, but the mutab il ity of contin gency – 
lawless nature or unknown unknowns – 
have become the dynamic motor of a 
compu ta tional mode of predic tion aiming 
not simply at avoid ing but at stream ing risk 
towards its inev it able consequences. With 
the compu ta tional turn, the domin ance 
of uncer tainty and its unpro gram mable 
implic a tions have accel er ated the prolif er a-
tion of auto nomic responses. Here fear, 
anxiety and panic, as well as erratic beha-
viour and continu ous distrac tion are the 
motor of a social media culture of hyper-
 p res ence, and have become the univocal 
determ in ant of polar ized posi tions, short- 
circuit ing decision- making through  YES  
and  NO . As algorithms become the execut-
ors of sover eign decisions acting  when and  if 
the unse lec ted amounts of data can become 
func tional in stream ing, anti cip at ing and 
struc tur ing risk, then the compu ta tional 
turn comes to coin cide with an appar atus of 
governance oper at ing not only on bodies, 
but through the dati ﬁ c a tion of biolo gical, 
phys ical and cultural speciﬁ cit ies. 
cognit ive synthetic abstrac tions, and not 
simply learn ing  that , i.e. speciﬁ cit ies or 
context- bound know ledge.  
 Automated Criticality 
 In  How We Th ink , Katherine Hayles argues 
that the compu ta tional turn has led to an 
irre vers ible trans form a tion of analytic 
processing central to human it ies research. 
As methods of research and know ledge 
produc tion in the human it ies have become 
compu ta tion ally formed, Hayles suggests 
that code, algorithms and digital theory 
must become recog nized as an integ ral part 
of know ledge produc tion. Whilst compu ta-
tion involves quant it at ive methods of text 
analysis, the contin ental tradi tion in 
human it ies has histor ic ally ques tioned the 
notion- based and mnemonic studies in 
favour of crit ical, reﬂ ect ive and compar at ive 
learn ing. Hayles insists, however, that tech-
nical modes of know ledge are to be inte -
g rated and not opposed to crit ical modes of 
learn ing. As tech no logy has a direct impact 
on modes of under stand ing and learn ing, 
Hayles argues that web- based and machine 
reading oﬀ er new capa cit ies to process mass 
amounts of inform a tion that funda ment ally 
extend know ledge produc tion and not only 
possib il it ies of know ledge storing.  
 Algorithmic Sovereignty 
 Th e issue of how compu ta tional processing 
can extend the limits of know ledge and 
whether it can enhance the possib il it ies of 
crit ical think ing raise the ques tion of 
governance at the core of the compu ta-
tional turn. As auto nomic comput ing 
subtends the ubiquit ous use of stat ist ical 
methods to calcu late risks, so has techno- 
governance, as Michel Foucault anti ci   -
p ated, become oper at ive or able to act upon 
or respond directly to contin gen cies and
CONTEMPORARY, THE 
might imagine a reﬂ ec tion of and  in time 
and tempor al ity that precisely looks for a 
rela tion to the present that would allow 
escap ing the logic of defer ral and post-
pone ment towards which the revolu tion-
ary left  is oft en tending. Drawing on 
Nietzsche’s notion of the untimely and the 
anachron istic, as prerequis ites of being 
truly contem por ary, philo sopher Giorgio 
Agamben renders ‘the contem por ary’ as 
the indi vidual ‘who ﬁ rmly holds his gaze 
on his own time so as to perceive not its 
light, but rather its dark ness’ ( Agamben 
2009 : 44). To be contem por ary then means 
to inhabit a stance toward the present that 
pays atten tion to the ‘unlived’. Agamben 
thus proposes ‘an arche ology’ that ‘returns 
to that part within the present that we are 
abso lutely incap able of living’ (ibid.: 51). In 
this view, to be contem por ary is the capa-
city to recom pose the present by having it 
being ‘touched’ (53) by the past, in order to 
actu al ize its trans- temporal poten ti al it ies. 
 Alternative models of a less melan cholic 
and instead urgent polit ics of the present 
have been developed in the ﬁ elds of posthu-
man, post co lo nial, femin ist or postra cial, as 
well as in recent envir on ment al ist, climate 
change 
and 
anthro po cene 
discourse. 
Leaving behind linear and tele olo gical 
patterns of think ing time, the ‘abso lute 
bound ary between here- now and there- 
then’ is being ques tioned by thinkers 
conceiv ing ‘new tempor al it ies (space time-
mat ter ings)’ such as femin ist phys i cist 
Karen Barad ( 2014 : 168). ‘Th ere is nothing 
that is new,’ Barad main tains, ‘there is 
nothing that is not new’ (ibid.). In other 
words, one cannot (not) be surprised by 
what is taking place in time, while tradi-
tional notions of cause and eﬀ ect become 
lost in the nonlin ear ity of ‘space time mat ter-
ings’. 
Deconstructing 
any 
dicho tomy 
between (histor ical) human ity and (time-
less) nature, the revi sion of tempor al ity 
accord ing to the complex it ies of an updated 
 See also  AI (Artiﬁ cial Intelligence); 
Metadata Society; Altergorithm; Execution; 
Neocybernetics; Postimage. 
 Luciana Parisi 
 CONTEMPORARY, THE  
 In the aft er math of the ruptures of 1989, 
when post mod ern ity ulti mately turned 
 posthis toire  in certain quar ters of ideo logy 
produc tion, 1 a pervas ive present seemed 
to have triumphed for ever over past and 
future alike. At the ﬁ nal stage of the 
immin ent break down of the grand narra-
tives of progress and eman cip a tion, with 
glob al iz a tion and digit al iz a tion prior it iz ing 
spatial over temporal matters, exclus ive 
and exclu sion ary rela tions with a partic u lar 
under stand ing of contem por an eity became 
some thing of a norm. Obsessively and 
viol ently colon iz ing the present as the 
only temporal zone relev ant for capit al ist 
valor iz a tion and geopol it ical tamper ing 
neces sitated the meth od ical oblit er a tion of 
what may cause threats to the mono poly of 
the now. Hence, the discurs ive and mater ial 
neut ral iz a tion of the past by a cultural 
economy of memori al iz a tion and musei ﬁ -
ca tion is only paralleled by the temporal 
philo sophies of ﬁ nance and secur ity, both 
predic ated on notions of anti cip a tion, 
‘futures’ and pre- emption. Combined, 
retro ma niac nostal gia and the poli cing of 
tomor row elicited a dispersal of contem por-
an eit ies; the produc tion of a ubiquit ous 
present of however multiple presents blocks 
futur ity as much as it does histor ical thought. 
 Most concep tions of time and tempor-
al ity based on a critique of the present state 
of power rela tions and the projec tion of a 
coming revolu tion reject any aﬃ  rm a tion 
of the present as a sign of stasis, anomie or 
surrender. Yet pausing for a moment with 
the contin gency of that aﬃ  rm a tion, one
of some respons ib il ity,’ based on a ‘non- 
contem por an eity with itself’, concern ing 
‘those who  are not there , of those who are 
no longer or who are not yet  present and 
living ’ ( Derrida 1994 : xix). Assemblage 
and assembly of dispar ate tempor al it ies, 
posthu man 
onto lo gies 
and 
polit ical 
projects alike, the contem por ary conceived 
as a reality of becom ings and an ethical 
resource relin quishes the reduct ive con-
tem por an eity of  posthis toire . Th is way, to 
enter the contem por ary means to leave the 
present as now- time for the poten ti al ity of 
a commun al ity of tempor al it ies, in which 
the thinkab il ity of the future is connec ted 
to, but not limited by, an archae ology of a 
shared present touched by whatever past. 
 See also Afrofuturism; Art; Art in the 
Anthropocene; Metamodernism; Ecopathy; 
Posthuman Museum Practice,  
 Note 
 1. For a useful discus sion of the prob lem atic 
notion of ‘post mod ern ism’ as a ‘special 
moment in  posthis toire thought’ see 
archi tec tural histor ian Anthony Vidler’s 
chapter ‘Postmodern or  Posthistoire ?’ in 
his  Histories of the Immediate Present: 
Inventing 
Architectural 
Modernism 
(Cambridge,  MA :  MIT Press, 2008), 
191–200.    
 Tom Holert 
 COSMOPOLITICS  
 Cosmopolitics points towards the re- 
invig or a tion of the plan et ary sphere of 
polit ical theory and action in the age of 
ecolo gical anxiety. It arises out of the reali-
z a tion that the triumphal ist rhet oric of 
cosmo pol it an ism is out of place in a world 
in which the cultural and polit ical assump-
tions on which it rested have been radic ally 
mater i al ist onto logy which fully acknow-
ledges the trans form at ive, hybrid entan gle-
ments of tech no logy, geology, biology, 
physics, polit ics, etc., may yield a concept of 
the present to be appro pri ately framed as 
‘the contem por ary’. Such framing may be 
expan ded to be organ ized around the real iz-
a tion that the realm of the now is always 
shared by others of whatever kind and time. 
Th e ‘shared inhab it a tion of time’, as artist 
and theor ist Shuddhabrata Sengupta from 
Raqs Media Collective once put it, ‘leads one 
to think of diﬀ er ent registers of temporal 
exist ence’, because, contrary to the assump-
tion ‘that contem por an eity has a certain 
single direc tion and a certain single velo city’, 
it may be possible ‘to think of these inhab it-
a tions of shared moments of time leading to 
move ments in very diﬀ er ent direc tions and 
at diﬀ er ent speeds’ ( Raqs Media Collective, 
Sundaram and Zyman 2012 ). Th e emphasis 
on multi direc tion al ity and multive lo city 
certainly is key to an under stand ing of the 
contem por ary that avoids any reiﬁ c a tion of 
the present as homo gen eous, merely 
temporal and oper at ive disjunct ively with 
regard to past and future. Heterogeneous, 
5-D, non- iden tit arian and inclus ive, the 
contem por ary in this other sense is a 
moving assemblage of tempor al it ies, spati-
al it ies, mater i al it ies and live li hoods that is 
not neces sar ily depend ent on a future to be 
activ ated. Although poten tially ‘drawing 
energy from the thinkab il ity of the future’ 
and thus facil it at ing ‘a trans form a tion at the 
in- depth level’ ( Braidotti 2006a : 207), the 
contem por ary also thrives on radical 
coeval ness, or what anthro po lo gist Johannes 
Fabian has iden ti ﬁ ed as ‘the elements of a 
proces sual and mater i al ist theory apt to 
coun ter act the hege mony of taxo nomic and 
repres ent a tional [i.e. visu al ist] approaches’ 
( Fabian 2002 : 156). Furthermore, the 
contem por ary is the subject of a justice 
‘beyond all living present’, as Jacques 
Derrida called it, that is of ‘the prin ciple