CONTENTS

xi
 Violence 
 Koen Leurs, Tamara Shepherd 
and Alison Harvey  
 Z 
 Zombie 
 Birgit M. Kaiser and Kathrin Thiele 
 Tolerances and Duration 
 Trans* 
 Goda Klumbyt e˙ 
 Trans- corpor eal ity 
 Transhumanism/Posthumanism 
 (Un)Docu mented Citizenship
Acknowledgements 
 Th is volume is the culmin a tion of a seminar 
series, ‘Posthuman Glossary’, at  BAK , basis 
voor actuele kunst, Utrecht in 2015. 
Th e series was concep tu al ized by Rosi 
Braidotti and real ized in the context of 
 BAK research project Future Vocabularies/
Human–Inhuman–Posthuman 
and 
in 
cooper a tion with the programme ‘Th e 
Humanities in the Twenty-First Century’ of 
the Centre for the Humanities at Utrecht 
University, Utrecht. 
 Th e co- editors Rosi Braidotti and Maria 
Hlavajova would like thank the large, hard- 
working and dedic ated teams that set up 
the initial seminar series in both insti tu-
tions, and the equally talen ted team of 
editors and assist ants who helped with the 
ﬁ nal public a tion. Special grat it ude to 
Tobijn de Graauw and Toa Maes for input 
at both the content and the organ iz a tional 
level. Our heart felt thanks to the managing 
editor of the edit or ial assist ants team Goda 
Klumbytė, who main tained the main 
contact with the authors, co- ordin ated the 
editing of the manu script and completed 
the complex bibli o graph ical details, with 
the help of Elisa Fiore. 
 Th anks also to image editor Lucy Lopez, 
author editor Tom Clark, edit or ial assist-
ants Hidde van Greuningen and Gry 
Ulstein, and copy- editor Stephanie Paalvast. 
We are also grate ful to many colleagues 
from the Utrecht University, the Centre for 
the Humanities and the  BAK team for 
parti cip at ing in the events that led to this 
public a tion. 
 Sincere thanks are owed to all contrib-
ut ors to this volume, includ ing the artists 
who contrib uted their visual work and 
made  Posthuman Glossary an inter dis cip-
lin ary conver sa tion. 
 Last but not least, the co- editors wish 
to acknow ledge, through this volume as 
much as through the many projects in 
their decade- long collab or a tion, that the 
academic and the artistic insti tu tions 
belong to, and are account able for, one and 
the same world.  
xii
Series Preface 
 Th eory is back. 
 Critical theor ists of the univer sal, organic 
or situ ated kind used to be deﬁ ned by their 
ethical- polit ical commit ment to account for 
power rela tions at work in the real world, as 
well as in scientiﬁ c prac tice. But their 
prestige waned through out the 1990s. Th e 
‘theory wars’ in the  USA targeted crit ical 
theory as an outdated ideo lo gical activ ity, 
dismiss ing the theor ists as ‘tenured radic als’. 
Th ey were replaced by new ‘content 
providers’, experts and consult ants, in a 
context of increased privat iz a tion of 
academic research. By the turn of the 
millen nium, with the inter net as the only 
true ‘content provider’, former theor ists were 
relo cated to the market- oriented posi tion of 
‘ideas brokers’ and, in the best cases, ‘ideas 
leaders’. Nowadays, we are all entre pren eurs 
of the mind. Th e cognit ive char ac ter of 
contem por ary capit al ism and its high tech-
no lo gical medi ation para doxic ally produced 
a ‘post- theory’ mood and intens i ﬁ ed attacks 
on radical thought and crit ical dissent. Th is 
negat ive mood also resul ted in criti cism of 
the social and schol arly value of the 
Humanities, in a neo- liberal corpor ate 
univer sity ruled by quan ti ﬁ ed econom ics 
and the proﬁ t motive. 
 And yet, the vital ity of crit ical think ing 
in the world today is palp able, as is a spirit 
of insur gency that sustains it. Th eoretical 
prac tice may have stalled in the academic 
world, but it exploded with renewed 
energy in other quar ters, in media, society, 
the arts and the corpor ate world. New 
gener a tions of crit ical ‘studies’ areas have 
grown along side the clas sical radical 
epistem o lo gies of the 1970s: gender, femin-
ist, queer, race, post co lo nial and subal tern 
studies, cultural studies, ﬁ lm, tele vi sion 
and media studies. Th e second gener a tion 
of crit ical ‘studies’ areas includes animal 
studies and ecocriti cism; cultural studies 
of science and society; reli gion studies; 
disab il ity studies; fat studies; success 
studies; celebrity studies; glob al iz a tion 
studies; and many more. New media has 
spawned new meta- ﬁ elds: soft  ware studies, 
inter net studies, game studies, digital post-
co lo nial studies and more. Th e end of the 
Cold War has gener ated conﬂ ict studies 
and peace research; human rights studies, 
human it arian manage ment; human rights- 
oriented medi cine; trauma, memory and 
recon cili ation studies; secur ity studies, 
death studies; suicide studies; and the list is 
still growing. Th ese diﬀ er ent gener a tions 
of ‘studies’ now consti tute a theor et ical 
force to be reckoned with. 
 Th eory is back! 
 Th is series aims to present carto graphic 
accounts of these emer ging crit ical theor-
ies and to reﬂ ect the vital ity and inspir a-
tional force of ongoing theor et ical debates. 
 Rosi Braidotti 
 
xiii
Contributors 
 Stacy Alaimo  is Professor of English, 
Distinguished Teaching Professor, and 
Director of the Environmental and 
Sustainability Studies Minor at the University 
of Texas at Arlington. Her  public a tions include 
 Undomesticated Ground: Recasting Nature 
as Feminist Space (2000),  Bodily Natures: 
Science, Environment, and the Material Self 
(2010) and  Protest and Pleasure: New 
Materialism, Environmental Activism, and 
Feminist Exposure (2016). 
 John Akomfrah  (born 1957 in Accra, Ghana) 
lives and works in London. He has had 
numer ous solo exhib i tions includ ing Nikolaj 
Kunsthal, Copenhagen, Denmark (2016), 
Arnolfi ni, Bristol,  UK (2016), Bildmuseet 
Umeå, Sweden (2015), Eli and Edythe Broad 
Art Museum, Michigan,  USA (2014), Tate 
Britain, London,  UK (2013–14) and a 
week- long series of screen ings at Mo MA , 
New York,  USA (2011). 
 Ramon Amaro  is Associate Lecturer in Critical 
Theory and Media Philosophy at the Centre 
for Cultural Studies, Digital Culture Unit, 
Goldsmiths, University of London. His joint 
academic back ground in philo sophy, 
soci ology and engin eer ing comes to fruition 
in his research looking at the philo soph ical 
dimen sions of computer model ling of social 
processes, with partic u lar refer ence to black 
ontology and algorithmic equal ity in machine 
learn ing systems. 
 Cecilia Åsberg  is Professor at Linköping University, 
Sweden. She leads The Seed Box: A Mistra–
Formas Environmental Humanities 
Collaboratory, the largest post- conven tional 
eco- human it ies initi at ive in Sweden. She directs 
the research group The Posthumanities Hub, 
and co- directs the three- univer sity centre for 
gender excel lence,  GEX cel International 
Collegium for Advanced Transdisciplinary 
Gender Studies. Her postdis cip lin ary research 
in gender studies trans lates into femin ist 
posthu man it ies. 
 Lila Athanasiadou  is a freelance writer, 
researcher and exhibition designer and the 
coordinator of the Corporeal Discourse 
program at the Master of Interior 
Architecture at ArtEZ. She has recently 
graduated from the Master of Architecture 
at TU Delft with a thesis on rethinking 
pedagogical practices through Guattari’s 
‘metamodelling’, examined through the 
genealogical relationships between Athens 
and Kassel as dramatized in the spatiality 
of documenta (14). 
 Daniel Baker  is an artist, curator and theor ist. A 
Romani Gypsy born in Kent, he holds a PhD 
in Gypsy aesthet ics from the Royal College of 
Art, London. Baker acted as exhib itor and 
advisor to the fi rst and second Roma 
Pavilions; ‘Paradise Lost’ and ‘Call the 
Witness’ at the 52nd and 54th Venice 
Biennales respect ively. His art and writing 
xiv