COSMOPOLITICS

a more funda mental cause. Despite the 
broad ness of the cosmo pol itan outlook in 
compar ison to the narrow ness of nation al-
ist essen tial ism, the vision of the cosmos 
to which it appeals has been revealed as 
both anthro po centric and ethno cen tric. 
Awareness of the moment ous scale of 
anthro po genic changes to the natural 
processes of the Planet summed up by the 
Anthropocene and accel er ated by ever-
more tangible evid ence of climate emer-
gency and species extinc tion has rendered 
redund ant attempts to think the polit ics of 
the cosmos in purely human terms or 
solely in refer ence to the Western polit ical 
tradi tion. Th e timeli ness of cosmo pol it ics 
lies in the poten tial it oﬀ ers to open up for 
discus sion 
the 
auto matic 
exclu sions 
inscribed in cosmo pol it an ism, thereby 
lift ing the restric tion on imagin ing a plan-
et ary community that is inclus ive of all 
kinds of human and non- human actors. 
 Cosmopolitics signals the emer gence 
of an expan ded notion of polit ics which, 
as Bruno Latour has argued, both goes 
beyond ‘give- and-take in an exclus ive 
human club’ (2004b: 454) and dislodges 
unre ﬂ ect ing 
assump tions 
about 
the 
cosmos as a ‘ﬁ nite list of entit ies that must 
be taken into account’. Th e opening up of 
the list of entit ies entitled to parti cip ate in 
cosmo pol it ical debate could be seen in the 
rise of a plan et ary juris pru dence that in 
the case of the Constitution of Equador 
codi ﬁ es the rights of Pachamama or 
nature, while the Swiss Constitution now 
recog nizes the right to dignity of plants 
and other organ isms. Th e novelty of 
cosmo pol it ics as a supra- polit ical project 
lies in making expli cit the connec tion of 
humans to other species, but also to entit-
ies with a distinct mater i al ity and non- 
human agency, from rocks and rivers to 
particles and phys ical forces. 
 Th e ecolo gical urgency of the cosmo-
pol it ical propos i tion can be detec ted in 
destabil ized. Th e conﬁ d ence with which 
cosmo pol it an ism could assert the valid ity 
of an aﬃ  rm at ive and progress ive polit ical 
narrat ive that was destined to eclipse out-
dated modes of national iden tity has been 
under mined by the appar ent revers ib il ity 
of the processes of glob al iz a tion, both 
econom ic ally and in terms of polit ical con-
scious ness. Th e cosmo pol it ical propos i tion 
recog nizes the desirab il ity of an ambi tious 
refram ing of polit ics that reaches beyond 
settled categor ies, borders and territ or ies, 
but also the prac tical and philo soph ical 
diﬃ   culties in recom pos ing plan et ary 
polit ics on a more inclus ive basis. 
 Even during the rise of glob al iz a tion in 
the 1990s, advoc ates of cosmo pol it an ism 
were forced to acknow ledge that there was 
nothing inev it able about the emer gence of 
a global, plural, popular polit ical conscious-
ness as a consequence of increased mobil-
ity and inter con nec ted ness, with theor ist 
Pheng Cheah stating that ‘an exist ing global 
condi tion’ should not be mistaken for an 
‘exist ing mass- based feeling of belong ing to 
a world community (cosmo pol it an ism)’ 
( Cheah and Robbins 1998 : 31). In the wake 
of the global economic crisis begin ning in 
2008, the mater ial condi tions for the 
produc tion of senti ments of trans- national 
and post- national belong ing have retreated, 
bring ing a retrench ment of cultural paro-
chi al ism and popular cynicism towards the 
polit ical motives of global elites and their 
cultural agents. In place of the accep ted 
rules and restric tions of polit ical ration al ity 
based on the inter change between nation- 
states and citizen- subjects, the cosmo pol it-
ical proposal opens out onto what Isabelle 
Stengers has referred to as the ‘unknown 
consti tuted by . . . multiple, diver gent 
worlds’ (2005: 995) and their poten tial 
artic u la tions. 
 Th e stalling of the cosmo pol itan 
mission, and the mobil iz a tion of the 
cosmo pol it ical propos i tion, stem also from
glob al iz a tion, tech nos cience, late capit al-
ism and climate change (oft en, very prob-
lem at ic ally, by delib er ately blur ring the 
distinc tions between science ﬁ ction and 
science fact; cf. ‘science faction’ in 
 Herbrechter 2013 : 107–34). 
 Th e preﬁ x ‘post-’ (in analogy with the 
discus sion of the post mod ern and post-
mod ern ism follow ing  Lyotard 1992b ) also 
has a double meaning: on the one hand, 
it signi ﬁ es a desire or indeed a need to 
somehow go  beyond human ism (or the 
human), while on the other hand, since 
the  post-  also neces sar ily repeats what it 
preﬁ xes, it displays an aware ness that 
neither human ism nor the human can in 
fact be over come in any straight for ward 
 dialect ical or histor ical fashion (for 
example, in the sense: aft er the human, 
the posthu man). Th e  crit ical in the phrase 
‘crit ical posthu man ism’ gestures towards 
the more complic ated and non- dialect ical 
rela tion ships between human and post  -
hu man (as well as their respect ive depend-
ence on the  nonhu man ). Posthumanism in 
this crit ical sense func tions more like an 
anamnesis and a  rewrit ing of the human 
and human ism (i.e. ‘rewrit ing human ity’, in 
analogy with Lyotard’s notion of ‘rewrit ing 
modern ity’:  Lyotard 1991 ).  Critical post-
hu man ism asks a number of ques tions that 
address these complic a tions: how did we 
come to think of ourselves as human? Or, 
what exactly does it mean to be human 
(espe cially at a time when  some humans 
have appar ently decided that they are 
becom ing 
or 
have 
 already 
become 
 post human)? What are the motiv a tions for 
this  posthu man iz ing process and when did 
it start? What are its implic a tions for 
nonhu man others (e.g. the ‘envir on ment’, 
‘animals’, ‘machines’, ‘God’, etc.)? 
 Th e adject ive  crit ical in the phrase 
‘crit ical posthu man ism’ thus signi ﬁ es at 
least two things. It refers to the diﬀ er ence 
between a more or less uncrit ical or 
Peter Sloterdijk’s call for a ‘new consti tu-
tional debate’ involving a ‘network of 
processes’ to ‘recon sti t ute the collect ive 
of Earth Citizens as a collect ive subject ive 
in various arrange ments’. Such a process, 
respond ing 
to 
the 
revival 
in 
the 
Anthropocene of a neo-Hobbesian State- 
of-Nature, would as he argues neces sar ily 
have to take into account ‘the cohab it a tion 
of the citizens of the Earth in human and 
non- human forms’ ( Sloterdijk 2015 : 337–
9). Cosmopolitics shows the way beyond 
the busi ness- as-usual consensus around 
the subject and bound ar ies of the domain 
of global polit ics to tack ling the deep- 
rooted conﬂ ict of interest between glob al-
ized elites and the plan et ary poor, who are 
least well equipped to delay the impacts of 
climate change. It also reﬂ ects recog ni tion 
of collect ive, polit ical respons ib il ity on the 
level of human kind for the trans form a tion 
of the cosmos from a species- neutral back-
drop to an unwit ting exten sion of the 
human realm. 
 See 
also 
Anthropocene; 
Planetary; 
Ecosophy; 
Earth; 
Geopolitics; 
Non-
Human Agency; Posthuman Rights. 
 Maja and Reuben Fowkes 
 CRITICAL POSTHUMANISM  
 Critical posthu man ism is a theor et ical 
approach which maps and engages with 
the ‘ongoing decon struc tion of human ism’ 
(cf.  Badmington 2000 ). It diﬀ er en ti ates 
between the  ﬁ gure  of the ‘posthu man’ (and 
its present, past and projec ted avatars, like 
cyborgs, monsters, zombies, ghosts, angels, 
etc.) and ‘posthu man ism’ as the contem-
por ary social  discourse (in the Foucauldian 
sense), which nego ti ates the press ing 
contem por ary ques tion of what it means 
to be human under the condi tions of