CRITICAL POSTHUMANISM

appar atus of liter acy and its central insti tu-
tion of liter at ure, with all its social, 
economic and cultural- polit ical implic a-
tions, its regimes of power and its aesthet-
ics behind. 
 To counter the trend of seeing posthu-
man ism merely as the ‘next theory fashion’, 
my  Posthumanism: A Critical Analysis 
( Herbrechter 2013 ) takes as its start ing 
point the ques tion as to what extent post-
struc tur al ism and decon struc tion have 
anti cip ated current posthu man ist formu-
la tions and critiques of subjectiv ity. Th is 
aspect is partic u larly import ant with 
regard to the current discus sion about the 
import ance and future role of the human-
it ies. Th e ﬁ rst academic public a tions that 
system at ic ally engage with the idea of the 
posthu man and posthu man ism appeared 
in the late 1990s and early 2000s (in books 
and articles by Neil Badmington, Rosi 
Braidotti, Elaine L. Graham, N. Katherine 
Hayles, Cary Wolfe and others), all of 
which approach posthu man ism through a 
more or less post struc tur al ist or decon-
struct ive lens. Th ey do so, however, by 
embra cing two new aspects: a return to 
or of the ques tion of tech no logy (as it 
had been provoc at ively formu lated by 
Heidegger ( 1977 )) and the ques tion of the 
future of the human it ies. 
 An increas ing part of the academy and 
the (theor et ical) human it ies in partic u lar 
have been embra cing this new context to 
form new, inter dis cip lin ary alli ances with 
the sciences and crit ical science studies 
(e.g. with Bruno Latour’s actor–network 
theory, spec u lat ive realism or new femin ist 
mater i al ism). One major aspect concerns 
the redeﬁ n i tion of the rela tion ship between 
humans and tech no logy – or the role of the 
history of ‘tech nics’ for human (and non- 
human) evol u tion. Donna Haraway’s early 
work on the cyborg (in the 1980s) received 
the wide spread discus sion it deserved. 
 popular (e.g. in many science ﬁ ction 
movies or popular science magazines) 
and a  philo soph ical and reﬂ ect ive approach 
that invest ig ates the current  post an thro po-
centric desire . Th is desire artic u lates itself, 
on the one hand, in the form of an anti ci -
p ated  tran scend ence of the human condi-
tion (usually through various scen arios of 
disem bod i ment – an approach (and an 
entire move ment that is best desig nated by 
the term ‘transhuman ism’) and, on the 
other hand, through a (rather suspi cious) 
attempt by humans to ‘argue them selves 
out of the picture’ precisely at a time when 
climate change caused by the impact of 
human civil iz a tion (cf.  Anthropocene ) calls 
for urgent and respons ible,  human action. 
 Th e other meaning of ‘crit ical’ is a 
defence and possibly a re- inven tion of 
some human ist  values  and  meth od o lo gies 
which, in the face of a funda mental trans-
form a tion provoked by digit al iz a tion and 
the advent of ubiquit ous comput ing and 
social media, appear to have become 
obsol ete, or to be in urgent need of revi-
sion (espe cially crit ical meth od o lo gies 
which are related to tradi tional forms of 
‘liter acy’, ‘reading’ and ‘think ing’). Th e 
ques tion here is how to remain ‘crit ical’ in 
the sense of devel op ing reading tech-
niques, forms of concep tu al iz a tions and 
subjectiv it ies that are both self- reﬂ ex ive 
and aware of their own gene a lo gies (i.e. 
able to stay ‘crit ic ally’ connec ted with 
human ist, and pre- human ist, tradi tions 
and espe cially ‘literal’, ‘liter ary’ and ‘textual’ 
approaches). 1 
 Studies of liter at ure’s twenty- ﬁ rst-
century exten sions 2 have ques tioned the 
broader reson ances of the idea that the 
liter ary is currently being ‘over taken’ by 
processes of digit al iz a tion, glob al iz a tion 
and tech nos cientiﬁ c change. In this current 
supposedly ‘post- liter ary’ moment, a crit-
ical posthu man ist (and ‘coun ter tex tual’) 
approach is both aware and wary of the
rela tion ship between human agency, the 
role of tech nology and envir on mental 
and cultural factors from a post- or non- 
anthro po centric 
perspect ive 
( Braidotti 
2013 ). Postanthropocentric posthu man it ies 
are still about humans and human it ies but 
only in so far as these are placed within a 
larger, ecolo gical, picture (cf. for example the 
insti tu tion al iz a tion of ‘medical human it ies’, 
‘envir on mental human it ies’ and ‘digital 
human it ies’).Th e latter, in partic u lar, will have 
to address the role of new and conver ging 
media and their social and cultural implic a-
tions, as well as the prolif er a tion of digital 
and virtual real it ies and their biopol it ical 
dimen sions (e.g. new forms of surveil lance 
and commodi ﬁ c a tion, new subjectiv it ies and 
‘biomedia’; cf.  Th acker 2004 ). 
 Critical posthu man ism thus draws 
together a number of aspects that consti-
tute ‘our’ early twenty- ﬁ rst-century reality 
and cosmo logy and links these back 
gene a lo gic ally to their begin nings and pre-
ﬁ g ur a tions within human ism itself (cf. 
 Herbrechter and Callus 2005 ,  2012 ). 
 See also Anthropism/Immanent Humanism; 
Posthumanism; 
Decolonial 
Critique; 
Posthuman (Critical Th eory; Speculative 
Posthumanism).  
 Note 
 1. Th is is one of the main concerns of the 
Critical Posthumanism Network, which I 
co- direct with Ivan Callus and Manuela 
Rossini; (see  http://crit ic al posthu man 
 ism.net) . 
   2. See for instance the journal  CounterText 
( http://www.euppub lish ing.com/loi/
count ). 
 Stefan Herbrechter 
Attempts to rethink the onto lo gical aspect 
of tech no logy and the polit ical role of 
tech no lo gical determ in ism, however, also 
look at previ ous philo sophies of tech no-
logy (espe cially in Heidegger, Ellul and 
Simondon), most prom in ently in Bernard 
Stiegler’s work. In the aft er math of the so- 
called ‘science wars’, which high lighted at 
once the neces sity of cultural recu per a-
tions of scientiﬁ c prac tice and the call for a 
new dialogue between the sciences and the 
human it ies, the new or ‘posthu man it ies’ 
(cf. the title of Cary Wolfe’s inﬂ u en tial 
series with University of Minnesota Press) 
are set to over come the tradi tional ‘two 
cultures’ divide at last. Th is is, however, 
happen ing under extremely adverse condi-
tions, namely the mater ial base of an 
increas ingly glob al ized advanced and 
neolib eral capit al ism, and the trans ition 
from ‘analogue’ (human ist, ‘lettered’, book 
or text- based) to ‘digital’ (posthu man ist, 
‘code’, data or inform a tion- based) soci et ies, 
cultures and econom ies. 
 Th e currently emer ging ‘posthu man it ies’ 
there fore have to engage with the posit ive 
but also the prob lem atic aspects of the trans-
form at ive poten tial that a new dialogue or 
alli ance between the human it ies and the 
sciences contains. Th e focus on the post-
human as a discurs ive object, on post hu-
man ism as a social discourse and on 
post hu man iz a tion as an ongoing histor ical 
and onto lo gical process allows both com-
munit ies – the human it ies and sciences – to 
create new encoun ters and test new hypo-
theses that may lead to greater polit ical and 
ethical aware ness of the place of the human, 
the nonhu man and their envir on ments 
(espe cially in connec tion with press ing 
issues like climate change, deple tion of 
natural resources, the destruc tion of bio-
diversity, global migra tion ﬂ ows, terror ism 
and insec ur ity, biopol it ics etc.). Basically,
Th e divide between the two ﬁ elds, however, 
is not merely histor ical: it is onto lo gical. 
 Racialization, 
from 
a 
deco lo nial 
perspect ive, is not an aber ra tion of history 
produced by yet another of ‘the human’s’ 
constitutive 
exclu sions 
or 
other ings. 
Racialization does not run along the same 
onto lo gical lines as, for example, sexual 
diﬀ er ence or gender: it is not that the basic 
mech an ism of constitutive exclu sion was 
also applied to non-European bodies and 
popu la tions in a manner that diﬀ ered 
histor ic ally from the applic a tion to non- 
male bodies. Th e project of deco lo nial 
critique is not the task of another correct-
ive to the unjus ti ﬁ ed norm ativ ity of the 
concept and ﬁ gure of ‘the human’. Rather, 
the found ing commit ment of deco lo nial 
critique is a chal lenge to the very onto logy 
of ‘the human’ as an endem ic ally violent 
concep tual appar atus. 
 Th is clear focus on racial iz a tion and its 
anti- black logic as the essen tial struc ture 
of ‘the human’ partic u larly distin guishes 
this schol ar ship from that of posthu man 
femin ism, with its roots in the debates 
about the concept of sexual diﬀ er ence. As 
the essen tial ist/construc tion ist debates of 
the 1990s displayed, the concept of sexual 
diﬀ er ence lies on the razor’s edge of a 
univer sal ist, biolo gical determ in ism and 
geopol it ic ally speciﬁ ed, social construc-
tion ism. Emergent out of this tension, 
posthu man femin ism approaches embod i-
ment through the axes of sexual diﬀ er ence, 
gender binar ies and poly morph ously 
perverse sexu al ity. Th is work tends to 
 D 
 DECOLONIAL CRITIQUE  
 To think and live race is to think and live 
history in every atom of one’s body. Unlike 
the essen tial ist stain that haunts concepts 
of sexual diﬀ er ence, racial diﬀ er ence is 
purely the eﬀ ect of violent cultural encoun-
ters with diﬀ er ing manners of living. Yet, 
despite this histor ic ally construc ted char-
ac ter, we cannot shake it oﬀ : we continue to 
embody race as the damning mark of 
diﬀ er ence that W. E. B. DuBois named ‘hair, 
skin, and bone’. Decolonial schol ar ship on 
race, espe cially that inﬂ ec ted by queer 
theory, locates this violent history of racial-
iz a tion as the site of the produc tion the 
concept and ﬁ gure of ‘the human’. It insists 
that racial iz a tion, a central tool of the colo-
nial scene, drives the emer gence of the 
modern concept of ‘the human’. For deco-
lo nial critique, racial iz a tion is endemic to 
‘the human’, not a pesky by- product or 
prob lem atic eﬀ ect of it. 
 To bring race and racial iz a tion into 
contact with posthu man ism is, there fore, 
not a simple task. As the 2015 Special Issue 
of  GLQ , ‘Queer Inhumanisms’, makes 
amply clear, the divi sions between deco lo-
nial, queer schol ar ship on racial iz a tion and 
schol ar ship on posthu man ism are fraught 
polit ic ally, histor ic ally and even onto lo gic-
ally. Th e co- editors, Dana Luciano and Mel 
Chen, explain in their Introduction that 
they chose ‘inhu man isms’ in an eﬀ ort ‘to 
recol lect and fore ground the very histor ies 
of dehu man iz a tion too oft en over looked in 
celeb rat ory posthu man isms’ (2015: 196).
claim to univer sal ism. In this manner, 
posthu man ism inher its the long tradi -
tions of Anglo-American and European 
femin isms, with their nine teenth- century 
roots 
in 
precisely 
this 
prob lem atic 
eclipse of the gendered char ac ter of 
Enlightenment human ism. Posthumanism, 
a 
late 
twen ti eth- century 
emer gence, 
complic ates and extends this funda mental 
critique to the entangled arcs of tech no lo-
gical medi ation and nonhu man sentient 
life, valor iz ing z oe and embod i ment as the 
onto lo gical sites of inter rog a tion. 
 Decolonial theor ies of racial iz a tion, 
espe cially those groun ded in the post- 
iden tit arian 
epistem o lo gies 
of 
queer 
theory, gener ally assume one, if not both, 
of two geohis tor ical coordin ates: ﬁ ft eenth- 
century European colo ni al ism and/or 
nine teenth- century chattel slavery, espe-
cially in the United States. Th e distinc tions 
between these two geohis tor ical sites are 
crucial, but I gener al ize them here as one 
move ment to explain how they both place 
racial iz a tion at the primary and essen tial 
origin for the construc tion of the ﬁ gure 
of ‘the human’. Th ese geohis tor ical co-
ordin ates thereby instan ti ate diﬀ er ent 
social onto lo gies from those assumed in 
posthu man ism. 
 Decolonial schol ar ship emerges out of 
clas sical post co lo nial critiques, such as 
Frantz Fanon, Aimé Césaire, Edward Said, 
and also out of slightly later iter a tions, 
such as Gloria Anzadúa, Stuart Hall, Paul 
Gilroy, Sadiya Hartman, Hortense Spillers, 
Eduard Glissant, Maria Lugones and 
perhaps espe cially Sylvia Wynter. It is 
Wynter who gives the most expans ive and 
emphat ic ally mater i al ist account of the 
decol on iz ing of, as she calls the ﬁ gures, 
‘Man1’ and ‘Man 2’. I oﬀ er a brief over view 
of her work as an exem plar of the deco lo-
nial critique of Man. 
 Wynter’s work is histor ic ally expans ive 
and the full bibli o graphy of her published 
emphas ize 
the 
socio- epistem o lo gical 
instabil it ies of these metrics, focus ing 
partic u larly on the constitutive exclu sion 
of sexual diﬀ er ence as the ‘other’ or ‘partic-
u lar’. By histor iciz ing this phenomenon in 
the seven teenth- and eight eenth- century 
normal iz a tion of bour geois sexu al ity, 
posthu man femin ism opens onto the 
imman ent plas ti city of embod i ment and, 
ulti mately,  zoe for the posthu man ist 
project. Th is histor ical loca tion places it in 
provoc at ive tension with deco lo nial femin-
ists, such as Hortense Spillers and Maria 
Lugones, who argue (with diﬀ er ent geopol-
it ical refer ents) that gender is always 
already a product of colo nial modern ity, 
inter pel lat ing only those subjects already 
in the throes of iden ti ﬁ c a tion with the 
ﬁ gure of ‘the human’. Th e diﬀ er ences 
between the foci on sexual diﬀ er ence and 
gender in these critiques remain to be 
parsed. From the perspect ive of deco lo nial 
critique, however, the eﬀ ort to undo ‘the 
human’ through the axes of either gender 
or sexual diﬀ er ence still works within the 
closed economy of colo nial modern ity. 
 At a general level, both posthu man ism 
and deco lo nial critique share a common 
point of depar ture – namely, the demand 
to move through and beyond the ﬁ gure 
of ‘the human’. Th e deco lo nial emphasis on 
the violent dehu man iz a tion endemic to 
the ﬁ gure of ‘the human’, however, orients 
deco lo nial schol ar ship towards a diﬀ er ent 
set of histor ical coordin ates than those 
assumed by posthu man ism. Th e follow ing 
is a brief account of these diﬀ er ent histor-
ical coordin ates, which mani fest distinct 
onto lo gies oper at ive in the two projects. 
 Posthumanism 
largely 
places 
the 
ﬁ gure of ‘the human’ in the European 
Enlightenment era of seven teenth- century 
ration al ism 
and 
eight eenth- century 
liberalism. Th is epistem o lo gical- polit ical 
construc tion, so the critique goes, birthed 
a human ism that stakes an unas sail able