DIFFRACTION

Across Wynter’s expans ive histor ical 
argu ments, she also devel ops a radic ally 
mater i al ist account of the embod i ment of 
these concep tual appar ati that oﬀ ers a 
partic u lar point of contact with threads of 
posthu man ism. Wynter builds on Fanon’s 
inven tion of socio geny to argue for a 
neuro chem ical account of our embod i-
ment of racial ized diﬀ er ences. As she 
writes in ‘Unparalleled Catastrophe for 
Our Species? Or, to Give Humanness a 
Diﬀ erent Future: Conversations’, socio-
genic scripts of symbolic life/death repeat 
and sedi ment norm at ive eval u ations of 
our shared social worlds by activ at ing 
‘the 
opiate- reward 
(placebo) 
and 
opiate- block ing (nocebo) neuro chem ical 
system of the . . . uniquely evolved human 
brain’ (2015: 58). Th is mater i al ist turn 
towards the neuro chem ical embod i ment 
of both posit ive and negat ive eval u ations 
carried by the concep tual appar atus of ‘the 
human’ oﬀ ers an intriguing bridge to the 
Deleuzian, Harawayan techno- medi ation 
threads of posthu man ism. 
 See 
also 
Afrofuturism; 
In/Human; 
Necropolitics; Neocolonial; Postmedieval; 
Real Cool Ethics; Socially Just Pedagogies. 
 Shannon Winnubst 
 DIFFRACTION  
 ‘Diﬀ raction’ is Donna Haraway’s term for a 
reading method that is neither negat ively 
crit ical (dismissive) nor reﬂ ex ive (iden tity- 
polit ical). Haraway ( [1992] 2004a ,  1997 ) 
argues against the polit ics of nega tion as 
well as she argues against the polit ics of 
reﬂ ec tion. Negation puts the negated on a 
pedes tal and may there fore not be the best 
femin ist reading strategy. For example, 
negat ing the work of Bruno Latour for its 
genderblind ness, its neat separ a tion of the 
work is, as yet, diﬃ   cult to assemble. In 
‘Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/
Truth/Freedom: Towards the Human, 
Aft er Man, Its Overrepresentation – An 
Argument,’ Wynter locates the emer gence 
of the prob lem atic ﬁ gure of Man 1 in the 
writ ings of the Renaissance human ists of 
the ﬁ ft eenth century, the same century that 
brings European colo ni al ism to various 
parts of the globe. Focusing on ‘the theo-
Scholastic know ledge system of the medi-
eval order of Latin-Christian Europe’ (2003: 
20), Wynter argues that the shift  in this 
period from super nat ural caus a tion to 
natural caus a tion enables and enlivens two 
other global shift s: the massive expro pri-
ation and enslave ment of two human 
groups (‘Indos’ and ‘Negroes’); and the 
possible rise and devel op ment of the phys-
ical sciences as a new order of human 
cogni tion, which would come fully to 
fruition in the work of Darwin. According 
to this same Renaissance human ist ‘closed 
order of know ledge’, wherein ‘Nature’ 
replaces ‘God’, the ﬁ gure of the ‘Negro’ 
emerges as the secu lar ized ‘name of evil’ 
(2003: 307), leading Wynter to place early 
deﬁ n i tions of ‘race’ in Peter Martyr’s texts of 
1516, with the ﬁ rst attempt at racial clas si-
ﬁ c a tion in the work of Francois Bernier in 
1684. Th e ﬁ ft eenth- century contem por an-
eous move ments of European colo ni al ism 
and Renaissance human ism thereby mark 
the emer gence of what Wynter names 
‘Man1’, a complex concep tual appar atus 
that locks the ﬁ gure of the human directly 
into the viol ence of colo ni al ist racial iz a tion. 
‘Man2’ then emerges as the nine teenth- 
century ‘biocentric’ concept of post-
Darwinian science, build ing on the late 
eight eenth- century racial iz ing taxonom ies 
of Linnaeus, that carries the binary viol ence 
of Man/Other endemic to the prior theo lo-
gical appar atus into the fully secu lar ized 
discourses of science and their inter twin ing 
with bour geois capit al ism.
liberal or Marxist/social ist or lesbian or 
sexual- diﬀ er ence or. . .). Diﬀ ractive read-
ings take oﬀ  else where and have diﬀ er ing 
eﬀ ects. Imagine acci dent ally picking up a 
book written by Y or encoun ter ing an 
artwork of Z. It may very well be that the 
reader or viewer is inter pel lated by Y’s 
writing ( van der Tuin 2014 ) or aﬀ ected by 
Z’s artwork ( Papenburg and Zarzycka 
2013 ) before having consciously recapit-
ulated one’s posi tion as scholar, one’s 
femin ist stance or the makers’ canon ical 
repres ent a tion. Th is implies that one 
cannot presume to know when and where 
schol ar ship begins, when and how femin-
ism is triggered or how a text or arte fact is 
liked or disliked. Th e diﬀ ract ive moment is 
when such inter pel la tions or aﬀ ec tions 
happen. Th e surprise of an inter pel la tion 
or of aﬀ ect is taken to be a moment of 
insight that is of import ance for the 
produc tion of know ledge. 
 Karen Barad ( 2003 ,  2007 ) has worked 
out the consequences of Haraway’s diﬀ rac-
tion by further ing the argu ment that 
diﬀ ract ive read ings can be made product-
ive for femin ist schol ar ship: 
 Moving away from the repres ent a tion al ist 
trap of geomet rical optics, I shift  the focus 
to phys ical optics, to ques tions of diﬀ rac-
tion rather than reﬂ ec tion. Diﬀ ractively 
reading the insights of femin ist and queer 
theory and science studies approaches 
through one another entails think ing the 
‘social’ and the ‘scientiﬁ c’ together in an 
illu min at ing way. What oft en appears as 
separ ate entit ies (and separ ate sets of 
concerns) with sharp edges does not actu-
ally entail a rela tion of abso lute exter i or ity 
at all. Like the diﬀ rac tion patterns illu-
min at ing the indeﬁ n ite nature of bound-
ar ies – display ing shadows in ‘light’ regions 
and bright spots in ‘dark’ regions – the 
rela tion of the social and the scientiﬁ c is 
a rela tion of ‘exter i or ity within’. Th is is not 
a static rela tion al ity but a doing – the 
social and the tech nical and its over look-
ing of the labour and suﬀ er ing of labor at-
ory animals does not change the work or 
do any good for femin ism. Instead, a negat-
ively crit ical eval u ation of Latour’s schol ar-
ship and writing draws more atten tion to 
Latour and less to femin ism. Likewise, 
Haraway says that ‘reﬂ ex iv ity, like reﬂ ec-
tion, only displaces the same else where’ 
(1997: 16) and is equally not crit ical 
enough. For instance, if I were to reﬂ ect on 
the French philo sophy of Michel Foucault, 
I would ﬁ rst expose my femin ism and then 
I would use what has become of femin ism 
within the conﬁ nes of my analysis in order 
to expose Foucault’s mascu line bias, 
notwith stand ing the fact that both (my) 
femin ism and Foucauldian histor ical 
epistem o logy exceed such expos i tions! A 
certain pattern of repe ti tion under lies both 
negat ively crit ical and reﬂ ex ive analyses as 
a dismissive femin ist analysis tends to 
repeat the negated minutely and reﬂ ex ive 
femin ist analysis does the same by care-
fully mirror ing what a text or other cultural 
arte fact does to a precon ceived femin ist 
subject. Both meth od o lo gies ulti mately 
leave the negated or the displaced 
unchanged. Diﬀ ractive read ings try to 
circum vent 
these 
consequences 
and 
provoke change. 
 Diﬀ raction is ﬁ rst and fore most a 
reading strategy that does justice to cracks 
in the academic canon ( van der Tuin 
2015a ). Readings of texts that follow the 
canon are read ings that care fully repro-
duce the estab lished para met ers of 
academic schol ar ship. Such repro duc tion 
may be caused by nega tion or reﬂ ec tion. 
Imagine perform ing a femin ist reading of 
the work of X. Th e result is a distan cing act: 
both femin ism and the work of X are left  
untouched because the reading method 
assumes that femin ism and X’s work are 
separ ate entit ies and that ‘femin ism’ is a 
known and stable posi tion (it is either