DIGITAL PHILOSOPHY

Nature hypo thesis (see  Fredkin 1992 ) 
presumes that all things in nature, along 
with their prop er ties, can be shown to be 
discrete. Consequently, Fredkin argues 
that continu ity and inﬁ n ity are just illu-
sions, and that the past, present and future 
of the universe all evolve in a step- like 
fashion. In this respect, it is possible to say 
that digital philo sophy proposes an onto-
logy in which compu ta tion is seen as a sort 
of lowest common denom in ator for all 
that exists. It is possible to say, there fore, 
that at the core of digital philo sophy one 
ﬁ nds not only the system atic quant it at ive 
trans form a tion of the qual it at ive, and the 
belief that the imma ter ial will lead to the 
mater ial, but also a profound re- assess ment 
of the rela tion between simpli city and 
complex ity. 
 Th is is evident in the work of Stephen 
Wolfram ( 2002 ), who uses cellu lar auto-
mata to demon strate that, by follow ing 
basic discrete rules, very simple compu ta-
tional systems are capable of gener at ing 
increas ingly complex levels of beha viour 
over time. Wolfram extends these obser va-
tions to the universe itself, which he sees 
running on similar simple (and comput-
able) rules that gradu ally construct 
complex results. In this sense, Wolfram 
deﬁ nes his Principle of Computational 
Equivalence 
as 
explain ing 
empir ical 
phenom ena via the most funda mental 
hypo thesis: everything builds up from a 
simple level, and when a system has 
reached its own point of maximum 
complex ity, it should be considered to be as 
complex as anything else. Wolfram main-
tains that this prin ciple opens up a ‘new 
kind of science’ ( Wolfram 2002 ). In fact, for 
him it is a ‘new rule of nature’ (ibid.: 720) 
with ‘a quite unpre ced en ted array of 
implic a tions for science and scientiﬁ c 
think ing’ (5). Epistemologically speak ing, 
the prin ciple aims to prove the exist ence of 
an upper limit not only on the complex ity 
the latter’s discrete model of organ iz a tion 
to the struc ture of the cosmos, and 
advanced the thesis that the entire universe 
is nothing but the output of a determ in istic 
compu ta tion. Today, digital philo sophy 
draws in part on Zuse’s insights to develop 
a diverse body of theor ies that hold that 
there is a funda mental inform a tional and 
quant it at ive prin ciple under ly ing the 
universe, which processes the latter’s evol-
u tion in real time. 
 To a greater or lesser extent, this sort of 
Aristotelian prime mover has been iden ti-
ﬁ ed in terms of a compu ta tional mech an-
ism. Some see it as a discrete system similar 
to a cellu lar auto maton (see  Fredkin 2003 ; 
 Wolfram 2002 ); others view it as a quantum 
compu ta tional process (see  Lloyd 2007 ; 
 Deutsch 1997 ), or as a univer sal Turing 
machine 
(see 
 Schmidhuber 
1997 ). 
Generally, however, all of these perspect-
ives consider inform a tion to be more 
funda mental than matter and energy. Th e 
notion of compu ta tion, in turn, comes to 
the fore as a concept that super sedes both 
math em at ics and physics: it is viewed as a 
prin ciple or as a cause, or indeed as ‘a phys-
ical activ ity’ ( Toﬀ oli 1982 : 165), that might 
be able to account for what the theor et ical 
phys i cist John Archibald Wheeler has 
called ‘it from bit’ ( 1990 : 310). 
 Digital philo sophy main tains that, ‘if 
our universe is digital, then all the things in 
it are too, includ ing human bodies and 
brains’ ( Steinhart 2004 : 183). It there fore 
holds that compu ta tion is not just a tool to 
simu late reality, but rather the onto lo gical 
ground of reality itself. Th is claim is 
advanced expli citly by the computer 
scient ist Edward Fredkin, who is perhaps 
one of the most radical proponents of 
digital philo sophy (and who gave it its 
name). For Fredkin, phys ical laws are 
nothing but algorithms or on/oﬀ  instruc-
tions, and subatomic particles are nothing 
but units of binary inform a tion. His Finite
Algorithmic Information Th eory, arguing 
that the complex ity of a law is to be meas-
ured by compar ing it with the complex ity 
of the data that this law attempts to account 
for (see  Chaitin 2006b  and  2006c ). 
According to Chaitin, a rule must be 
simpler than the outcome of its applic a-
tion. In this respect, a law truly explains 
some thing only if its input is concise whilst 
its output is not. Chaitin consequently 
applies his algorithmic theory of inform a-
tion to biology (for example, he makes 
 DNA  the simple input that gener ates a 
complex organ ism as its output; see 
 Chaitin 2012 ), and to the devel op ment of 
everything that exists. ‘All is algorithm’, 
he claims (2007: 235), for the essence of 
objects is to be conveyed by the shortest 
program able to express that object’s 
inform a tional content. In this view, it is 
compu ta tional processing, rather than 
math em at ical equa tions, that can best 
describe the real: in Chaitin’s theory there 
is no formal reduc tion to static and eternal 
perfec tion, 
but 
rather 
an 
oper at ive 
compres sion, which leaves room for the 
compre hen sion of the dynam ism of 
empir ical phenom ena. 
 Digital philo sophy might well be ‘a new 
way of think ing about how things work’ 
( Fredkin 2003 : 189), yet many devel op-
ments in science and tech no logy have 
made this digital cosmo logy possible. 
Digital philo sophy can be seen to have 
grown out of the twen ti eth- century 
 technos cientiﬁ c belief that inform a tion 
is essen tial to the universe, and to attest 
to the fact that the computer is ‘a 
new 
and 
funda mental 
philo soph ical 
concept’ ( Chaitin 2006b : 11). Whether this 
concept should be taken as a meta phor 
or (as digital philo sophy main tains) as 
reveal ing 
univer sal iz ing 
meta phys ical 
truths remains open to debate. 
 One possible objec tion to digital philo-
sophy follows from consid er ing that other 
of possible real- life compu ta tions, but also 
on the heur istic capa cit ies of science. Our 
most power ful compu ta tional tools, then, 
are just as power ful as the natural phenom-
ena that they are inten ded to model. In 
Wolfram’s view, however, it also follows 
from the Principle of Computational 
Equivalence that the natural is not super-
ior to the arti ﬁ  cial, because algorithms can 
do anything that life does. 
 Digital philo sophy is an orient a tion in 
contem por ary science, yet its consid er a-
tion of the phys ical nature of beings aims 
to say some thing about the meta phys ical 
nature of Being. From a histor ical perspect-
ive, because of its search for an origin or a 
unique source of exist ence and becom ing, 
this digital meta phys ics recalls pre-
Socratic philo sophies. Moreover, when 
tracing a gene a lo gical traject ory for digital 
philo sophy, one should also include 
Pythagoras’ belief that number is the 
unify ing prin ciple of the real, Democritus’ 
atomism, Zeno’s demon stra tion of the 
contra dic tions of continu ity, and Galileo’s 
descrip tion of the universe as written in a 
code that needs to be deciphered. However, 
there can be little doubt that the most 
import ant philo soph ical refer ence for 
digital onto lo gists is Leibniz. Despite its 
many vari ants, digital philo sophy can be 
seen as a contem por ary re- elab or a tion of 
Leibniz’s monad o logy of discrete and self- 
contained units of being. Digital philo-
sophy’s monist meta phys ics is meant to 
oﬀ er an answer to the Leibnizian ques tion 
of ‘why is there some thing rather than 
nothing’ ( Leibniz 1989a : 210). It does so by 
propos ing, in a Leibnizian spirit, a world 
that is ‘the simplest in hypo thesis’ but ‘the 
richest in phenom ena’ ( Leibniz 1989b : 39). 
 Th e math em atician Gregory Chaitin 
has openly acknow ledged that ‘digital 
philo sophy is Leibnizian’ (2007: 236). 
Chaitin pays tribute to Leibnizian ideas on 
complex ity 
and 
random ness 
in 
his