DIGITAL RUBBISH

produce new organ isms and rela tions, 
which can be harmful in their eﬀ ects (as 
the rice contam in ated with heavy metal at 
the begin ning of this entry indic ates). 
Digital rubbish then suggests not only that 
we might attend to the over looked mater i-
al it ies and mater ial rela tions of these tech-
no lo gies, but also that we develop an 
expan ded approach to these mater i al it ies 
that does not settle on a fascin a tion with 
the ruins of consump tion, merely, but 
that creates new mater ial explor a tions 
and mater ial prac tices that address the 
splin ter ing and complex inputs, outputs 
and posthu man trans form a tions that 
accom pany our techno- ecolo gical digital 
lives. 
 See also Mattering; General Ecology; 
Obsolete Technologies; Noise. 
 Jennifer Gabrys 
indic ates, the modes of matter ing to which 
digital media tech no lo gies contrib ute are 
multiple. Which is to say that digital 
rubbish is gener at ive of more than just 
obvious mater ial remain ders in the form 
of discarded hard drives and computer 
monit ors. Instead, digital rubbish is gener-
at ive of processes of mater i al iz a tion that 
splinter oﬀ  in multiple direc tions depend-
ing upon whether elec tron ics are being 
manu fac tured, miner als are being mined 
for their internal work ings, or cast- oﬀ 
personal computers are circu lat ing to 
land ﬁ lls or processing plants. To focus on 
these mater ial aspects of digital rubbish is 
to commit to a partic u lar mater ial- polit ical 
and ecolo gical construc tion ( Stengers 
2008 ) of the eﬀ ect of these tech no lo gies. 
 While elec tron ics continue to prolif er-
ate, and seem to oﬀ er up newfound levels 
of speed, eﬃ   ciency and productiv ity, 
they at the same time gener ate mater ial- 
polit ical and envir on mental prob lems that 
are distinctly posthu man in char ac ter.
did – or what cyber cul ture then rehashed 
with a dose of Silicon Valley excite ment – 
but the diﬀ er ent visu al iz a tion systems that 
give us oper a tional repres ent a tions of the 
planet. Th is is the view of the Earth since 
the  Vostok I space ﬂ ight in 1961 carrying: 
the ﬁ rst human to orbit the planet and able 
to describe the ground- detached view. It’s 
the Earth that features on the cover of the 
ﬁ rst  Whole Earth Catalog in 1968, and on 
the inside pages hailing the imagery of the 
satel lite era: the neces sary coﬀ ee table 
book of 243  NASA  images, in full colour, 
from the Gemini ﬂ ights in 1965 – for only 
$7. Th e Earth furnishes the home. 
 Our under stand ing of the Earth is 
medi ated by a variety of repres ent a tional 
tech niques and is itself a product of the 
tech no lo gical era. ‘Th ey alone shall possess 
the earth who live  from the powers of the 
cosmos’, quoted Walter Benjamin ( 2008 : 
58) in his short text ‘To the Planetarium’ 
from 1928, analys ing tech no lo gical ways of 
organ iz ing the  physis  – both the gaze 
upwards, and from up there, back down-
wards. Th e satel lite- based images of the 
Earth since the 1960s and leading up to the 
famous Blue Marble of 1972 (the  Apollo 17 
ﬂ ight) mark subsequent examples in the 
series of images that deﬁ ne the Earth from 
space. Th e escape velo city ( Virilio 1997 ) 
that allows accel er at ing objects from aero-
planes to space ships to leave the Earth’s 
gravity- bound surface is also what then 
allows us to see the Earth from above. Th e 
old etymo logy of the Earth as  eorþe , refer-
ring to some thing diﬀ er ent from the 
 EARTH  
 Th e Earth is a planet, of an age of about 
4.54 billion years and deﬁ ned by its 
geolo gical form a tions, density, biosphere, 
hydro sphere and an atmo sphere that 
sustains life. It is more than a world for 
humans and deﬁ ned by its life- sustain ing 
condi tions and its plan et ary rela tions 
( Woodard 2015 ). On a plan et ary level, 
it is one complex dynamic system where 
biosphere, atmo sphere and many of the 
geolo gical spheres inter act; on an extra- 
plan et ary level it is as dynamic, part of 
the grav it a tional pull, peri odic rota tion, 
cosmic rays and the radi ation of the sun. 
Buckminster Fuller called it ‘space ship 
earth’, marking the spec u lat ive begin nings 
of post- plan et ary design: ‘We are all astro-
nauts’ ( Fuller 1969 : 14), who spin in space 
trav el ling at 60,000 miles an hour, in the 
midst of rich non- human life as well as the 
intens ive rela tions to other planets and 
the sun. 
 Th e Earth is also a complex ecosys tem 
where one should never mistake humans 
to be the centre of action; they are merely 
one part in a larger loop of processes. One 
way to refer to it is by way of a ‘holarchy 
arisen from the self- induced synergy of 
combin a tion, inter fa cing, and recom bin a-
tion’ ( Margulis and Sagan 1995 :18). 
 Besides the life of the organic and the 
inor ganic spheres, it is also a medi a s phere 
– by which we don’t have to think only of 
the Jesuit fantas ies of the imma ter ial reality 
of cogni tion such as Teilhard de Chardin 
 E