DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP

society: ‘Digital citizens are those who use 
tech no logy frequently, who use tech no logy 
for polit ical inform a tion to fulﬁ ll their civic 
duty, and who use tech no logy at work for 
economic gain’ ( Mossberger et al. 2008 ). 
 However, does use of tech no logy imply 
parti cip a tion or engage ment in a polit ical 
sense? Th e larger social context and the 
actual rami ﬁ c a tions for parti cip a tion and 
engage ment are complex and it is diﬃ   cult 
to gener al ize ﬁ nd ings focus ing on indi-
vidu als. While one can indeed point to 
studies indic at ing correl a tion between 
frequency of inter net use and civic engage-
ment, larger trends under mine overly 
optim istic conclu sions: ‘why is it that 
Internet use is at an all- time high while 
civic engage ment overall contin ues to 
decline?’ ( Greer 2008 ). 
 Engaging with this issue begins with 
the crit ical ques tion ing of terms like ‘digital 
native’, where tech no lo gical compet ence is 
equated with growing up in an envir on-
ment where digital devices are readily 
access ible. Th e ques tion of digital citizen-
ship in rela tion to youth – and why not 
consid er ing older people’s activ ism like the 
Spanish seniors organ iz ing in the ‘iaio-
ﬂ autas’ move ment 1 – needs to go beyond 
the ques tion of access and basic skills in 
order to inter rog ate people’s ‘capa city to 
project iden tit ies in collect ive spaces’ 
( Bennett 2007 ) and to develop an idea of 
how they engage polit ical prac tices and 
imagin ar ies without ignor ing the aﬀ ord-
ances of the medium. Th is includes the 
ques tion how move ments like Anonymous 
may func tion both as a gateway to polit ical 
activ ism and as an avenue for  slackt iv ism , 
the low- threshold illu sion of actual polit-
ical parti cip a tion ( Coleman 2013 ). 
 Infrastructure of Citizenship 
 Digital citizen ship, under stood in a wider 
and more funda mental sense than simply 
into contact with notions of the public 
sphere, in rela tion to Habermas or not 
( Calhoun 1993 ). 
 Th ese 
new 
public 
spheres 
and 
discourses are char ac ter ized by the emer-
gence and trans form a tions of modes of 
expres sion and commu nic a tion, as well as 
the struc tur ing of dissem in a tion, debate 
and produc tion of meaning through 
online plat forms (YouTube, Instagram, 
Twitter, Facebook, etc.) and the multi di-
men sional modes of circu la tion between 
them. Mobile tele phones allow for making 
photos and videos on the go, their manip u-
la tion through editing or visual ﬁ lters, 
instant sharing, comment ing and complex 
forms of order ing or collec tion- making. 
Other visual- narrat ive formats, such as 
inform a tion visu al iz a tion, web docu ment-
ar ies, etc. add to the prolif er a tion of  forms , 
the core char ac ter istic of which is their 
embed ded ness (hyper links, related items, 
comments, etc.) and the blur ring between 
recep tion and produc tion ( Kessler and 
Schäfer 2009 ). 
 The Making of Digital Citizens 
 New visual and textual forms of (self-)
expres sion and parti cip a tion aﬀ ect not only 
the polit ical land scape as such, but also the 
devel op ment 
of 
polit ical 
and 
civic 
subjectiv it ies. In this respect, citizen ship is 
frequently discussed in connec tion with 
youth and, in partic u lar, with the ques tion 
of how to ‘produce’ citizens, i.e. how to 
make sure that young people are learn ing 
the ethos and skills required for civic and 
polit ical parti cip a tion. Th e concept is oft en 
discussed in similar terms as the now less 
current notion of the ‘digital divide’: use, 
and in partic u lar compet ent use, deﬁ nes an 
in/out logic, where the oft en expli cit goal is 
to bring as many people as possible into the 
fold. Citizens are, in a sense, simply under-
stood as the func tion ing units of a liberal
(also) a prescrip tion. With Hume, one 
could say that it forces us to leave the ‘is’ for 
the uncom fort able domain of the ‘ought’. 
Here, we will need a new kind of ethical 
think ing that is up to the chal lenge (cf. 
 Braidotti 2013 ). 
 See also  Algorithmic Studies; Metadata 
Society; 
Organization 
in 
Platform 
Capitalism. 
 Note 
 1. See  http://www.iaio ﬂ autas.org 
 Bernhard Rieder 
 DIGITAL PHILOSOPHY  
 Th e expres sion  digital philo sophy is used to 
denote a number of theor et ical perspect-
ives concern ing the ulti mate nature of 
reality. Advocates of digital philo sophy 
main tain, via a variety of diﬀ er ent and 
oft en irre con cil able voices, that the 
universe is funda ment ally discrete. Th at it 
is, in fact, digital. Th e digital, accord ing to 
these views, is a univer sal iz ing onto lo gical 
prin ciple: a prin ciple that is believed to be 
oper at ive well beyond the tech no lo gical 
constraints of compu ta tional media, and 
which is held to char ac ter ize both mental 
states and phys ical entit ies as inform a-
tional and, there fore, as also comput able. 
 Th e origin of digital philo sophy can be 
traced back to the work of the computer 
pioneer Konrad Zuse. In the late 1960s, 
Zuse put forth the hypo thesis of a 
computa tion- based 
phys ical 
universe. 
Zuse believed that ‘objects and element ary 
dimen sions of physics must not be comple-
men ted by the concept of inform a tion but 
rather should be explained by it’ ( Zuse 
1993 : 176). Focusing on the oper a tions of 
cellu lar auto mata, 1 Zuse ( 1970 ) exten ded 
famili ar ity and daily use, requires us to 
inter rog ate tech no logy as a place where 
power and know ledge ﬁ nd mech an ized 
expres sions, and polit ics are circum scribed 
by partic u lar inter faces, inform a tion archi-
tec tures and modes of order ing. Th is 
means not only analysis and critique of the 
plat forms them selves, not only analysis of 
partic u lar polit ical moments that link to 
them, but also reﬂ ec tion on the design and 
produc tion of tools that shape human rela-
tions and exper i ence – in other words, we 
need to inter rog ate the infra struc ture of 
citizen ship and polit ics. 
 Th is needs to go hand in hand with a 
crit ical distance from what Morozov 
( 2013 ) calls ‘solu tion ism’, the belief that 
every social problem can and should be 
solved by tech no lo gical means. It is worth-
while to remem ber that ‘not all polit ical 
actors are indi vidual human agents: a wide 
variety of agents, or “actants” in Latour’s 
termin o logy, have polit ical eﬀ ects while 
not being polit ical subjects in any conven-
tional sense’ ( Karatzogianni and Schandorf 
2012 ). We need not go as far as think ing 
that, by produ cing partic u lar soft  ware 
designs, we are ‘coding freedom’ ( Coleman 
2012 ), but if soft  ware has become a crucial 
element in polit ical prac tice, the time for 
‘embed ding the human it ies in engin eer ing’ 
( Fisher and Mahajan 2010 ) has come. 
 New media envir on ments have not 
only accom mod ated forms of polit ical 
prac tice that are, ulti mately, direc ted 
towards eman cip a tion and polit ical parti-
cip a tion, they are also sites and agents in 
more brutal struggles, includ ing phenom-
ena such as state- sponsored censor ship, 
cyber war fare and the fully digital theatre 
of war of which the much- discussed drone 
ships are but one element. Th e notion of a 
‘moral ity of things’ ( Verbeek 2011 ) never 
becomes as tangible, as  insist ing , as in the 
prac tice of design ing a tech nical object 
that is never a mere descrip tion, but always