EARTH

heavens and the under ground, gives way to 
a dynamic of vectors where the Earth 
becomes deﬁ ned from the heavens. Th e 
ener getic powers of accel er a tion trans form 
into the visual survey from above. As Fuller 
puts it, writing in the late 1960s, ‘However, 
you have viewed more than did pre- 
twen ti eth- century man, for in his entire 
life time he saw only one- millionth of the 
Earth’s surface’ ( Fuller 1969 ). Th is media- 
enhanced under stand ing of the Earth 
seeps into the biolo gical work of Margulis 
and Sagan even, when they narrate the new 
meta morph osis of visual epistem o logy 
that this tech no lo gical thrust ing and 
imaging brings about. It brings forth an 
imagin ary of the orbital that is shared by 
satel lites and astro nauts: ‘As if ﬂ oat ing 
dream ily away from your own body, you 
watch the planet to which you are now 
tied by only the invis ible umbil icus of 
gravity and tele com mu nic a tion’ ( Margulis 
and Sagan 1995 : 18). Th ey use such images 
and narrat ives to contrib ute to the idea of a 
holarchic view where the human is part of 
the micro- and macro cosmos. For them, 
the event is a sort of a plan et ary- level 
mirror image that carries Jacques Lacan’s 
concept from babies to space: to perceive 
‘the global envir on ment’ as the ‘mirror 
stage of our entire species’ (ibid.). 
 Much more than an echo of a psycho-
ana lytic stage for the plan et ary design, the 
medi ated vision turned back on the Earth 
itself was instru mental to a range of polit-
ical, scientiﬁ c and milit ary consid er a tions. 
Seeing the Earth from space was one such 
thing that had an eﬀ ect on climate research 
(also impacted by nuclear testing; see 
 Edwards 2010 ). It had an eﬀ ect on milit ary 
plan ning and geopol it ical eval u ation. It 
opened up again a holistic view of the 
planet as one, although at the same time 
as a complex system of a non- linear 
kind. It contrib uted to a variety of cultural 
moods and move ments. Even the gaze 
to the other worldly away from the Earth 
was a way to sharpen the focus on the 
planet but the tech no lo gical gaze toward 
deep space with tele scopes such as Hubble 
was never just about space and the 
inter plan et ary. 
 Geographical surveys beneﬁ ted from 
the developed lenses and image processing 
of satel lite- enabled remote sensing ( Cubitt 
1998 : 45–9). Th e perspect ive back to the 
Earth has enabled the ﬁ ne- tuning accur acy 
of corpor ate digital maps such as Google 
Earth and a massive milit ary surveil lance 
system too. 
 Th e Earth is constantly targeted by 
satel lites and remote sensing systems such 
as the Planetary Skin Institute. Th e insti-
tute is one among many systems that oﬀ er 
a poly scalar view of a multi pli city of 
processes for analysis. It boasts the ideal of 
reading these as ‘scal able big data’ that 
bene ﬁ ts communit ies and can ‘increase, 
food, water, and energy secur ity and 
protect key ecosys tems and biod iversity’ 
(quoted in  Bishop 2016 ). Alongside such 
systems as Hewlett Packard’s Central 
Nervous System for the Earth (Ce NSE ) it 
creates real- time surveil lance systems that 
intend more than mere obser va tion. As 
Ryan Bishop ( 2016 ) argues, these are 
massive level systems for constant data- 
based inter pret a tion of the various scales 
of the Earth that indeed deﬁ ne a speciﬁ c 
corpor ate- secur ity angle to the planet. 
 Our rela tions with the Earth are medi-
ated through tech no lo gies and tech niques 
of visu al iz a tion, soni ﬁ c a tion, calcu la tion, 
mapping, predic tion, simu la tion and so 
forth: it is primar ily through oper a tion al-
ized media that we grasp the Earth as an 
object of analysis. Even the surface of the 
Earth and geolo gical resources used to be 
mapped through surveys and ﬁ eld obser va-
tion. But now this advances through remote 
sensing tech no lo gies (see also  Parikka 
2015 ). One can argue that they are in a way
(MATERIAL) ECOCRITICISM