ECOHORROR

to think the world ‘disan thro po centric ally’, 
to use Cohen’s insight ful coinage (2013b: 
xxiv). To ‘anthropo- dis-center’ our sight 
means to liter ally swerve our prior it ies, 
liber at ing the world’s bodily natures from 
the discurs ive – and mater ial – delu sions 
of human- centred narrat ives. In our ‘post- 
geolo gical’ epoch – call it Anthropocene, 
Plantationocene or Capitalocene ( Haraway 
2015a ,  2015b ) – the crit ical tools of (mater-
ial) ecocriti cism can be usefully compli cit 
in the ‘joint eﬀ orts and collect ive imagin-
ings’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 197) neces sary to this 
veering move. 
 See also Diﬀ raction; Ecomaterialism; 
Mattering; 
Naturecultures; 
Neo/New 
Materialism; Ontological Turn; Storied 
Matter; Trans- corpor eal ity; Literature of 
Liberation; Material Feminisms; Posthuman 
Critical Th eory. 
 Serenella Iovino 
 ECOHORROR  
 Ecohorror is a relat ively newly delin eated 
subgenre of horror that never the less has 
deep roots in the genre. If horror is a genre 
about fear, concerned with explor ing what 
fright ens us and perhaps tempor ar ily exor-
cising or taming that fear, ecohor ror is a 
genre that deals with our fears and anxi et ies 
about the envir on ment. It grows out of and 
includes narrat ives that have been referred 
to, vari ously, as natural horror, creature 
features, and ‘nature strikes back’ narrat ives, 
in which the central narrat ive is frequently 
one of some element of the natural world 
attack ing human ity. Classic examples of this 
narrat ive include  Th em! ( 1954 ), in which 
spiders mutated by atomic testing in the 
New Mexico desert must be defeated, 
Alfred Hitchcock’s  Th e Birds ( 1963 ), in 
which birds attack humans for no discern-
ible reason, and Steven Spielberg’s  Jaws 
( 1975 ), in which a great white shark terror-
izes a New England coastal community, also 
with no obvious reason. While  Th em! 
presents its creatures as the direct result of 
human inter ven tion,  Th e Birds  and  Jaws 
present their attack ing animals simply as 
instances of nature’s Otherness. More recent 
examples of this type of ecohor ror narrat ive 
can be found in creature features from the 
Syfy Channel and low- budget produc tion 
company Th e Asylum, includ ing, for 
instance,  Mega Shark Vs. Giant Octopus 
( 2009 ),  Sharktopus ( 2010 ) and  Sharknado 
( 2013 ). Th e subgenre isn’t just about sharks, 
of course, although sharks (whether 
modern or prehis toric) are a popular choice. 
Other modern examples feature piran has, 
spiders, birds, crocodiles or alligators, bears, 
rats, snakes, and some times even bugs. 
 Many of the modern creature features 
are campy and diﬃ   cult to take seri ously, but 
they never the less reﬂ ect real anxi et ies about 
the natural world and its exist ence outside 
of human control. Th is anxiety is high-
lighted by such ﬁ lms’ simil ar it ies to other 
types of horror. In her blog  Horror 
Homeroom , horror scholar Dawn Keetley 
argues that  Jaws is essen tially a slasher ﬁ lm 
featur ing a shark instead of a masked 
human murderer; further more, she writes, 
‘Whether they render it in shark or human 
form, though, both  Jaws and  Halloween 
disclose the terri fy ing confront a tion with 
the nonhu man (the inex plic able, irra tional, 
and implac able) at the heart of horror.’ Th is 
confront a tion with the nonhu man is central 
to ecohor ror. 
 Ecohorror is not limited to the ‘nature 
strikes back’ narrat ive, however. Stephen 
Rust and Carter Soles provide an expan-
ded deﬁ n i tion of the genre in their intro-
duc tion to a special cluster of articles about 
ecohor ror in  Interdisciplinary Studies in 
Literature and Environment ( ISLE ), writing
that this larger deﬁ n i tion ‘includes analyses 
of texts in which horriﬁ c texts and tropes 
are used to promote ecolo gical aware ness, 
repres ent ecolo gical crises, or blur human/
non- human distinc tions more broadly’ 
(2014: 509–10). Ecohorror, they continue, 
‘assumes that envir on mental disrup tion is 
haunt ing human ity’s rela tion ship to the 
non- human world’ (510). Th is deﬁ n i tion of 
ecohor ror broadens the genre’s scope both 
in terms of what texts it might include as 
well as in terms of its relev ance to theor ies 
of the posthu man. 
 Th is expan ded deﬁ n i tion means that 
ecohor ror appears not just as a distinct 
subgenre of horror but as an eﬀ ect that may 
surface within other horror narrat ives as 
well. One instance of its envir on mental 
disrup tion can be found in taxi dermy’s 
pres ence in horror ﬁ lm. Animal taxi dermy 
repeatedly recurs within the genre, although 
it usually remains in the back ground, only 
brieﬂ y atten ded to (if at all), as in  Th e Blob 
( 1958 ),  Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ), 
 Frogs ( 1972 ),  Th e Exorcist ( 1973 ),  Dawn of 
the Dead ( 1978 ),  Willard ( 2003 ),  Shark 
Night 3D ( 2011 ), and  Cabin in the Woods 
( 2012 ). Rachel Poliquin writes, ‘All taxi-
dermy begs the ques tion, what is it? Perhaps 
we no longer wonder  what species the 
preserved creature once was, but the onto lo-
gical ques tion  what is it? Is always lurking 
with taxi dermy’ (2012: 38). Th ese ques tions 
do not apply only to the taxi dermy itself; 
taxi dermy’s pres ence evokes these ques tions 
in a more general sense and high lights 
horror’s already exist ing anxi et ies about the 
nonhu man, death and the lines between 
categor ies such as human/non- human, life/
death and animate/inan im ate. Furthermore, 
taxi dermy in horror evokes Mel Y. Chen’s 
animacy hier archy, in which some types of 
life or being are valued more highly than 
others (with sentient life at the top of the 
hier archy and inan im ate objects at the 
bottom). Chen describes the oppos ite of 
animacy as ‘the inan im ate, dead ness, 
lowness, nonhu man animals (rendered as 
insensate), the abject, the object’ (2012: 30). 
Taxidermied animals illus trate this end of 
the scale, as do many horror ﬁ lm monsters 
(zombies, vampires, animal monsters), 
while the humans who star in the ﬁ lms exist 
at the oppos ite end of the animacy hier-
archy. Applying Chen’s animacy hier archy 
helps reveal both the value system the 
audi ence brings to such narrat ives and also 
the break down of this value system in these 
ﬁ lms. Th is break down can be seen clearly 
in  Night of the Living Dead. Surrounded 
and over whelmed by creatures and objects 
lower on the animacy hier archy than 
they are (i.e., zombies), the human char ac-
ters (and their animate superi or ity) are 
destroyed and their place on the hier archy is 
revealed to be extremely unstable. Th us 
taxi dermy in horror ﬁ lm serves the broader 
func tions of ecohor ror, blur ring the lines 
between human and nonhu man. 
 Th is blur ring of lines can be taken even 
further within ecohor ror. Although discus-
sions of ecohor ror have oft en emphas ized 
attacks by the natural world or inva sions 
‘from our imme di ate natural envir on ment’ 
( Tudor 1989 : 62), this emphasis is built 
upon a presumed separ a tion between 
human ity and the non- human world. 
Human and non- human are not separ ate, 
however, so it is crucial to also consider 
ecohor ror narrat ives that examine the 
connec tions between the two. Th is means 
blur ring the lines between ecohor ror and 
body horror. In  Th e Fly ( 1986 ), for instance, 
the horror comes not only from Seth 
Brundle’s bodily disin teg ra tion over the 
course of the ﬁ lm but also from the disin-
teg ra tion of the bound ar ies between 
human and ﬂ y. And in Junji Ito’s manga 
 Uzumaki (1998–99), in which a Japanese 
village is contam in ated by spirals, the 
horror comes both from the way human 
bodies are twisted and changed by the