ECOLOGIES OF ARCHITECTURE

the archi tect is seen as a god- given, inspired 
creator and genius – and to promote 
the altern at ive imman ent morpho gen etic 
approach that is at once more humble and 
ambi tious ( DeLanda 2002 : 28). Th ere lies a 
(r)evol u tion ary poten tial in creat ing the 
‘new’, deﬁ ned as the circu la tion of de- coded 
and de- territ ori al ized ﬂ ows that resist the 
facile co- option by re- coding or captur ing 
( Deleuze and Guattari 2008 : 379). To speak 
of univo city of expres sion is to break with 
equi vo c ity of the hege monic linguistic sign. 
Action and percep tion are insep ar able, as 
are forms of life and their envir on ments. If 
the objects of know ledge were separ ated 
from the objects of exist ence, we would end 
up with a duality of mental and phys ical 
objects – bifurc a tion of nature – that leads 
to an onto lo gic ally indir ect percep tion. By 
contrast, the premise of the ecolo gies of 
archi tec ture is that percep tual systems 
 reson ate to inform a tion, where inform a tion 
is deﬁ ned as a diﬀ er ence that makes a diﬀ er-
ence ( Gibson 1986 : 249;  Bateson 1972 ). Th is 
‘direct realism’ is groun ded on the premise 
that, from the outset, real exper i ence is a 
rela tion of poten tial struc ture rather than a 
form less chaotic swirl onto which struc ture 
must be imposed by cognit ive process 
(sapi ence). Th e world is seen as an ongoing 
open process of matter ing, where meaning 
and form are acquired in the actu al iz a tion 
of diﬀ er ent agen tial virtu al it ies ( Barad 
2007 ). Following Deleuze’s argu ment, it is 
possible to assert that the genetic prin ciples 
of sensa tion (sentience) are thus at the same 
time the prin ciples of compos i tion of 
art(efact) ( Deleuze 2003 ).  
 Niche Constructionism 
 Architecture ought to reclaim its vanguard 
posi tion within the Epigenetic Turn which 
embraces  tekhne as constitutive of posthu-
man ity, and not just the other way around 
( Stiegler 2008–11 : 12). Experience is not 
an event ‘in’ the mind. Rather, the mind 
emerges from inter ac tion with the envir on-
ment. Th e predom in ant homeo static notion 
of struc ture in archi tec tural think ing has to 
give way to the event- centred onto logy of 
rela tions. Th e meta sta bil ity of exist ence 
(formerly known as sustain ab il ity) is to be 
mapped in the very act of becom ing. Th e 
Aﬀ ective Turn in archi tec ture concen trates 
on percep tion which occurs not on the level 
at which actions are decided but on the 
level at which the very capa city for action 
forms, the virtual ( Massumi 2002 : 79). If rep -
 res ent a tion is a means to an end (to clas sify), 
schi zo ana lytic carto graphy is a means to 
a means (to inter vene) ( Guattari 2013 ). 
Teleology cannot be used as the sole design 
criterion because the freedom of action is 
never a de facto estab lished condi tion, it 
is always a virtu al ity ( Evans 1997 : 16–17). 
Th is proto- epistem o lo gical level of poten-
tial iz a tion (priming) is already onto lo gical 
( Massumi 2015a : 71). It concerns change 
in the degree to which a life- form is enabled 
vis-à- vis its (built) envir on ment. Th eir 
recip rocal determ in a tion commits contem-
por ary archi tec ture to ecology in general 
and ethico- aesthet ics in partic u lar ( Guattari 
1995 ). Th e psycho tropic cry that ‘we 
shape our cities; there aft er they shape us’ is 
to be taken liter ally. Only recently have 
biolo gists conceded the eﬀ ect that ‘niche 
construc tion’ has on the inher it ance system 
( Jablonka and Lamb 2005 ;  Odling-Smee, 
Laland and Feldman 2003 ). Th ey conﬁ rm 
that a life- form does not only  pass ively 
submit to the pres sures of a pre- exist ing 
envir on ment (evo), but also  actively 
constructs its exist en tial niche (devo), that 
being the city in the Anthropocene. Th e 
implic a tions for the discip line of archi tec-
ture, consid er ing its quasi- causal role in the 
neo-Lamarckian  Baldwian Evolution (evo- 
devo), remain signi ﬁ c ant and binding 
( Wexler 2010 : 143).
Th e New Materialisms in general, and the 
Aﬀ ective Turn in partic u lar, seem to be 
gaining momentum to such an extent that 
even some of the schol ars of this aﬃ  l i ation 
have been urging caution ( Colebrook 
2010 : 168–9). However, as far as the discip-
line of archi tec ture is concerned, this 
other wise healthy dose of scep ti cism is not 
only prema ture but also coun ter pro duct-
ive. In its history, archi tec ture has under-
gone a gradual disas so ci ation from the 
mater ial realm and become an ulti mate 
white- collar profes sion. Th e consequent 
with drawal 
from 
reality 
(thesis 
of 
autonomy) has been vari ously seen as 
‘bad’ escap ism or a ‘good’ strategy of resist-
ance ( Hays 1981 ). Th e urge to ward oﬀ  the 
givens and to continue to contem plate 
(possible) altern at ives is praise worthy. But 
ideal ist brack et ing and messi anic ambi tion 
come at a price. Architects might end up 
paint ing them selves into a corner of 
impot ence by depriving them selves of the 
(virtual) means to inter vene. Aft er all, 
inter ven tion has always been the main 
trait of (any) mater i al ism. Th e best strategy 
of resist ance seems to lie not in oppos i tion 
but in (stra tegic) aﬃ  rm a tion ( Braidotti 
2012 ). Th e recog ni tion of the present–
future rela tion provides a point of depar-
ture for an ecolo gical account of anti cip a-
tion and/or creation akin to Isabelle 
Stengers’ think ing  par le milieu ( Stengers 
2005 : 187). What deﬁ nes the concept of 
futur ity is the insepar ab il ity of the event 
and its envir on ment. Futurity is a condi-
tion of the present; it is the anti- utopi an ism 
of the ecolo gies of archi tec ture  par 
excel lence . 
 See also Aﬃ  rmation; Anthropocene; 
Ecosophy; Mattering; Metastability; Neo/
New Materialism; Posthumanism. 
 Andrej Radman 
 ECOMATERIALISM  
 A bird’s- eye view of contem por ary intel lec-
tual devel op ments reveals an increas ingly 
debated and widely exer cised mater ial turn 
unrav el ling trans vers ally across entwined 
research ﬁ elds. Ranging from science 
studies, ecophilo sopy, ecocriti cism and the 
envir on mental human it ies to femin ist 
philo sophy, gender and queer studies, 
anthro po logy, art theor ies and media 
studies, this new paradigm has assumed 
various cross- devel op ing forms and labels, 
such as new mater i al isms, neoma ter i al ism, 
mater ial ecocriti cism and ecoma ter i al ism. 
Th ey all contest the master narrat ives of 
liberal human ist culture, foster ing instead a 
revolu tion ary model of envir on ment al ity 
based on the idea of agentic mater i al ity for 
the appre hen sion of current and future 
ecolo gical complex it ies. 
 Of all the terms asso ci ated with the 
mater ial turn, however, ‘ecoma ter i al ism’ is 
the most under deﬁ ned, leaving us in doubt 
as to its being just another label that did not 
turn into a catch phrase like ‘new mater i al-
isms’ or ‘neoma ter i al ism’. ‘Ecomaterialism’ 
inev it ably leaves us guess ing whether it can 
or cannot be used as a mere synonym for 
either of these terms, as it not only inter sects 
and over laps with their discourse, but is also 
simil arly accom pan ied by a ﬂ our ish of 
redeﬁ ned concepts: matter, agency, nature, 
human, non- human, inhuman, posthu man, 
objects, things and rela tions. Despite this 
ambi val ence, ecoma ter i al ism is currently 
conceived as a project of theor iz ing the 
earth’s human and other- than-human 
dwell ers in terms of multiple becom ings 
with a detailed consid er a tion of what, in 
fact, is the major concern of this approach: 
the global dynamic of crisis ecolo gies as a 
result of human- driven alter a tions of the 
plan et ary ecosys tems, other wise known as 
the compuls ive powers of the Anthropocene. 
Even if all the envir on mental uncer tain ties,