ECOMATERIALISM

epoch, an ecoma ter i al ist philo sophy of 
being and becom ing played out on these 
cross- scale inter ac tions is admit tedly a 
needful mode of thought. 
 In the face of intensi fy ing ecolo gical 
crises and mater ial intimacies, ecoma ter i al-
ism assists in imagin ing a world that is not 
relent lessly objec ti ﬁ ed, system at ic ally polar-
ized and innately gendered, but is profoundly 
earth- centred with ﬂ ex ible disan thro po-
centric models. Accordingly, ecoma ter i al-
ism is the epigen esis of the new mater i al ist 
theor ies, devel op ing in gradual diﬀ er en ti-
ation through their plat form and ampli fy ing 
their ecolo gical frame works, but not in 
the sense of restor ing a utopian ecolo gical 
harmony, or calling for an ideal istic bioso-
cial view of life. Instead, the under stand ing 
of ecology it supplies is an under stand ing of 
‘life in a vortex of shared precari ous ness and 
unchosen prox im it ies’ ( Cohen 2015a : 107). 
Ecomaterialism, in other words, compels us 
to reckon a living world with the protean 
condi tions of being mineral, vegetal, animal 
and human; a mater ial world in which 
earthly beings, things and forces are 
environed with the same ecolo gical, geolo-
gical and also biopol it ical plight. 
 In essence, then, ecoma ter i al ist thought 
is resol utely ecolo gical – and admit tedly in 
multi plex ways that acknow ledge the envir-
on mental vicis situdes result ing from the 
‘unmap pable land scapes of inter act ing 
biolo gical, climatic, economic, and polit ical 
forces’ ( Alaimo 2010 : 2). By analys ing how 
multiple becom ings within these land scapes 
entangle bodies, ecosys tems, geobi o chem-
ical forces, human narrat ives, discourses 
and actions, ecoma ter i al ism becomes an 
ecolo giz ing recourse to the mater ial- 
discurs ive prac tices explored in the new 
mater i al ist paradigm that oft en elicit unre-
solved conﬂ icts between human and 
nonhu man ‘forces, bonds, and inter ac tions’ 
as Michel Serres has put it in  Th e Natural 
Contract (2002: 39). Th e human inﬂ u ence 
on Earth inter fer ing with the evol u tion 
of the planet attests to these conﬂ ic tual 
human–non- human–envir on mental inter-
ac tions. But ecoma ter i al ism suggests that 
despite the anthro po genic signa tures in the 
geolo gical record and in global land scapes, 
water scapes and the climate, the human is 
the inter sti tial species of gener at ive ecolo-
gies and vital mater i al it ies. 
‘Ecomaterialism’ was ﬁ rst employed in 
this context by Jeﬀ rey J. Cohen and Lowell 
Duckert in their introduction, titled “Howl,” 
to the special issue of  postmedieval: a journal 
of medieval cultural studies . Cohen and 
Duckert argue that ecomaterialism ‘asks us 
to hear the howls of heterogeneous life 
forms – everywhere and from every thing,’ 
and that it “compels us to think of our own 
existence as interstitial beings” (2013:5). In 
her response essay ‘Th e Elements’ in the 
same issue, Jane Bennett describes the 
term ‘as an attempt to re-describe human 
experience so as to uncover more of the 
activity and power of a variety of nonhu-
man players amidst and within us’ 
(2013:109). In this sense, ‘ecomaterialism’ 
refers to the new ecologies of what 
Cohen and Duckert call ‘precarious bonds’ 
(2013: 4) and unpredictable partner -
ships between the human and the 
nonhuman agents in conceptually ﬂ uid 
and materially porous landscapes. Cohen 
and Duckert reinvigorate the term in 
their introduction to  Elemental Ecocriti -
cism , inviting ‘a deeper contemplation of 
ecomateriality’ (2015: 269) in terms of 
elemental relations. Ecomaterialism, they 
claim, ‘conjoins thinking the limits of 
the human with thinking elemental 
activity and environmental justice’ (2015b: 
5). In studying the collisions, frictions, 
conﬂ uences, and intimacies between the
ongoing co-emergences, ecomaterialism 
also enacts a concern, not only for the 
globetrotting 
crisis 
ecologies 
with 
detrimental corporeal eﬀ ects, but for the 
speciﬁ c pragmatics of the ethical, social, and 
political conditions of multiple becomings. 
Th e end results are the complicated 
phenomena of toxic landscapes, acidic 
oceans, dying species, viral microorganisms, 
and changing climate, indeﬁ nitely being 
reshaped by the intermixing geopolitical 
forces 
with 
intensifying 
catastrophic 
eﬀ ectivity that eventually triggers social 
unrest not containable in local geographies. 
Th is disenchanted material reality, as Karen 
Barad rightly points out, is undeniably 
‘sedimented out of particular practices that 
we have a role in shaping and through 
which we are shaped’ (2007: 390). When 
humans sediment with the world they 
shape, the problematizing conditions of 
their enactment become seamlessly bound 
together with the nonhuman to disclose 
what is not only susceptible of materially 
based ecological change, but also of 
social transformations that oft en manifest 
as regional chaos, social struggles, and 
disrupted sociopolitical structures. Th e 
impacts of climate change on agriculture 
and ecosystems illustrate well how the 
ecological becomes an extension of the 
social, oft en resulting in political and social 
strife and crisis.
 According to the World Bank report 
from November 2015, for example, ‘climate 
change could drive more than 100 million 
people into poverty by 2030 largely due to 
diﬃ   culties produ cing crops’ ( Worland 
2015 ). Climate change, the research ers 
claim, seri ously impacts food secur ity, land 
and water productiv ity, and live stock 
manage ment ( Hallegatte et  al. 2016 ). 
Th inking through such high uncer tain ties 
in symbolic and mater ial land scapes, 
ecoma ter i al ism navig ates a multi tude of 
shift  ing mean ings that are pivots of ideo lo-
gical, cultural and envir on mental conﬂ icts. 
Furthermore, analys ing the vital but also 
convo luted mater i al it ies in which the non- 
human is entangled along with the human, 
ecoma ter i al ism cata lyses a disan thro po-
centric ideo logy that demands not only 
sustain able ecolo gical policies but also a 
discurs ive change in cultural ethos. 
 Placing a concer ted emphasis on 
multiple modal it ies of becom ing that 
involve messy inter ac tions of human and 
non- human agen cies, ﬂ ows of elements 
and geobi o chem ical forces in the highly 
prob lem at ized zones of nature cul tures, 
ecoma ter i al ism also liber ates us from our 
spec u lat ive excep tion al ism. It invites a 
prac tice of think ing with what is around 
and inside us, before and aft er us, to 
extend the connect ive tissue of our rela-
tions, our mater i al ity and our creativ ity 
enmeshed in envir on mental complex it ies 
that unfold from the threshold of their 
ecolo gical, philo soph ical and liter ary 
labyrinths. Ecomaterialism, to put it bluntly, 
concep tu al izes the human subject as both 
mater i ally and cognit ively involved in 
these complex it ies and multiple becom-
ings. In this vision, the porous borders 
between human beings and more- than-
human envir on ments under score a sense 
of the seam less ness of the join between 
mater ial and social dynam ics, and conscript 
the criss- cross ing stories of human and 
non- human agen cies groun ded in an 
endlessly revis able narrat ive of life. 
 Although ecoma ter i al ism is not a self- 
authen tic at ing mode of thought, as it is not 
a static way of looking at the ecolo gical 
decline the world at large is facing, it may 
well be that the most diﬃ   cult task which the 
theor ists are called upon to perform today 
is to expose the histor ic ally and cultur ally 
condi tioned char ac ter of their discip lines, 
to preside over the dissol u tion of anthro po-
centric theor et ical know ledge. Oﬀ ering new