ECONTOLOGY

posi tions to theor ize the current dispar ate, 
multi valent social and envir on mental 
phenom ena may be the ﬁ rst step in devel-
op ing ecolo gical ways of being. Th ese posi-
tions, however, must be able to produce 
work able solu tions in order to over ride the 
persist ing util it arian human ist prin ciples 
that are still oper at ive in world cultures. 
And whether ecoma ter i al ism opens this 
path as the next step is yet to be seen. 
 See also  Anthropocene; In/human; Non- 
human Agency; Neo/New Materialism; 
(Material) Ecocriticism; Naturecultures. 
 Serpil Oppermann 
 ECONTOLOGY  
 Econtology is a neolo gism we need in 
order to address philo soph ic ally the prob-
lem atic situ ation man has manoeuvred 
himself into in the twenty- ﬁ rst century. 
Modern categor ies, based on oppos i tional 
think ing, lack the clarity to analyse our 
current situ ation that has been labelled as 
the Anthropocene: the present geolo gical 
epoch that started in the Industrial 
Revolution, during which human ity has 
begun to have a signi ﬁ c ant impact on 
the envir on ment. Econtology combines 
ecology and onto logy. Ecology is the 
science that analyses inter ac tions between 
organ isms and their envir on ment. In this 
systemic approach feed back recurs iv ity is 
the crucial mech an ism that regu lates 
processes in which all species, all artic u la-
tions of being are involved. Th is insight 
inspired Gregory Bateson in  Steps to an 
Ecology of Mind (1972) to redeﬁ ne collect-
ive conscious ness of nature as ‘mind’. From 
a cyber netic perspect ive he mapped reality 
as a pattern of patterns. By then Félix 
Guattari in cooper a tion with Gilles Deleuze 
had reworked Bateson’s notions of ‘schizo-
phrenia’ and ‘plateau’ in  Anti-Oedipus 
(1972) and  A Th ousand Plateaus (1980), 
the two volumes of  Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia . Patterns are the eco- social 
substance of a mental ecology. In  Th e 
Th ree Ecologies (1989) Guattari forged an 
envir on mental, a social and a mental 
ecology together. In this way nature, socio- 
cultural rela tions and indi vidual subjectiv-
ity were inter woven into an ecolo gical 
texture. I have labelled this threefold 
ecology as  ECO 3: phys ical, social and 
mental ( Oosterling 2015 ). 
 Ontology is the philo soph ical study of 
the nature of being and becom ing. What are 
the 
basic 
categor ies 
of 
being 
and 
how do beings relate? Aft er the critique and 
decon struc tion of meta phys ics by Friedrich 
Nietzsche, thinkers inspired by his writ ings 
like Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, 
Deleuze and Guattari focused in their 
‘reality check’ on forces instead of entit ies. 
Th e latter are second ary phenom ena: ever- 
provi sional results of the clash of forces that 
strive to incor por ate or anni hil ate each 
other. Yet these forces in them selves are 
non- signi ﬁ c ant vectors. In order to under-
stand their eﬃ  c acy and compre hend their 
coher ency – by asking not ‘what are they?’ 
but ‘how do they work?’ – their speciﬁ c 
artic u la tion as power rela tions need to be 
invest ig ated. Forces are always already 
inscribed into patterns of being as power 
rela tions. Th is shift  from force ( puis sance ) to 
power ( pouvoir ) led thinkers of diﬀ er ence to 
the conclu sion that onto logy and polit ics – 
the exclus ive domain where power rela tions 
are addressed – are no longer separ ate 
domains. Ontology is polit ical by deﬁ n i tion. 
Politics imme di ately deﬁ nes being. 
 Th is asks for a more artic u lated deﬁ n i-
tion of power. Aft er Claude Lefort’s distinc-
tion between Politics and the Political and 
Foucault’s focus on a micro phys ics versus 
macro phys ics of power, the inter ac tion of 
forces can be analysed on diﬀ er ent plat eaus
or planes: macro pol it ic ally on an insti tu-
tional and corpor at ive plane whereupon 
polit ics and corpor a tions as global players 
operate, meso pol it ic ally on the plane of 
grass- root resist ance where discip lined 
normal ity is contested, and micro pol it ic-
ally on the sub- indi vidual plane of aﬀ ects 
where people primar ily connect and on 
which market strategies and brand ing 
control collect ive and indi vidual desire. 
Th ese levels can only be distin guished 
system at ic ally and cannot be separ ately 
manip u lated. Th ey are inter de pend ent, 
inter twined in networks, encom passing all 
life forces on earth. 
 Given these insights, ecolo gical issues 
can be redeﬁ ned from a network theor et-
ical point of view as has been done by 
Bruno Latour in his Actor-Network-
Th eory ( ANT ). In our glob al ized, digit al-
ized, tech no lo gic ally highly advanced 
network society, as analysed by soci olo gist 
Manuel Castells in the 1990s, everything 
is connec ted to everything and as such is 
inﬂ u enced by and inﬂ u en cing every other 
thing. Th e onto lo gical emphasis there fore 
is on rela tions, not on (id)entit ies. In our 
present state of hyper g lob al iz a tion the 
complex ity of inter con nec ted processes 
has reached crit ical limits in which human 
inde cis ive ness can no longer be checked 
by human action. In the present Anthropo-
 cene, human action imme di ately and non- 
inten tion ally determ ines reality in its 
essen tial connectiv ity. Th is asks for a more 
precise notion of onto logy. 
 According to Peter Sloterdijk, man’s 
contem por ary predic a ment is techno- 
rela tional.  Dasein  is design ( Oosterling 
2010 ). Th eory is a prac tice. Although onto-
logy as a philo soph ical enter prise is highly 
theor et ical, it has prac tical applic a tion in 
inform a tion science and tech no logy. Th eo-
retical physics deals with the imman ent 
struc ture of reality. Yet, this cutting- edge 
research does not describe an object ive 
given. On a perform at ive and prac tical 
plane the exper i ment a tion of theor et ical 
phys i cists in their labor at or ies – scientiﬁ c 
prac tices where reality is checked ‘theor et-
ic ally’ – is already biased by the hand ling 
of tools and by the progress ive trans la tion 
of the results to a higher theor et ical level, 
upgrad ing the ﬁ nd ings of a partic u lar case 
to a univer sal law. 
 Latour and Isabelle Stengers have 
analysed this scientiﬁ c prac tice crit ic ally. 
Th e latter’s co- research with Ilya Prigogine 
on what really takes place – meth od o lo gic-
ally and epistem o lo gic ally – in labor at ory 
prac tices of phys i cists led her to develop 
the notion of an ecology of prac tice: 
  An ecology of prac tices does not have any 
ambi tion to describe prac tices ‘as they 
are’; it resists the master word of a 
progress that would justify their destruc-
tion. It aims at the construc tion of new 
‘prac tical iden tit ies’ for prac tices, that is, 
new possib il it ies for them to be present, 
or in other words to connect. It thus does 
not approach prac tices as they are – 
physics as we know it, for instance – but 
as they may become. 
 Stengers 2005 : 186 
 Within this (per)form at ive context the 
notion of polit ical ecology is used. Political 
ecology is the study of the rela tion ships 
between polit ical, economic and social 
factors with envir on mental issues and 
processes. On a macro pol it ical plane envir-
on mental issues are politi cized. Th is one- 
dimen sional notion of polit ical ecology, 
address ing power only on a macro pol it ical 
level, was intro duced by Frank Th one in 
Enzensberger in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Inserted in the Anthropocene perspect ive 
it needs multipolit ical (Deleuze/Guattari/
Foucault) 
and 
intras cientiﬁ c 
(Latour/
Stengers) ex plan ation. Mesopolitically it 
them at izes power rela tions within an ecology