ECOPATHY

bunch – to be sure, not neces sar ily better 
or worse people, just people with other 
prior it ies. I am refer ring here above all to 
the popular iz a tion of post- apoca lyptic eco- 
novels and ﬁ lms – ranging from, most 
recently, Kim Stanley Robinson’s canon and 
Paolo Bacigalupi’s  Ship Breaker to Michel 
Houellebecq’s  Th e Possibility of an Island 
and (the ﬁ lmic adapt a tion of) Cormac 
McCarthy’s  Th e Road  – in which the chro-
no tope of the beach signi ﬁ es the border 
between land and water as well as between 
past and future, ruins and air castles, desol-
a tion and despair. If  Seinfeld ’s trip to the 
beach was light- hearted and epis odic, 
contem por ary liter at ure more oft en than 
not arrives there in a grave mood, as its 
ﬁ nal, desti tute destin a tion: it’s here, or 
nowhere – and if it is here, I suppose, it is 
only brieﬂ y, echoing Foucault’s ﬁ nal lines in 
 Th e Order of Th ings : ‘Man would be erased, 
like a face drawn at the edge of the sea’ 
(2005: 422). But I am also think ing of an art 
project like Captain Boomer’s 2008 install a-
tion  Beached Whale . Th e Belgian collect ive 
created a real istic seven teen- metre-long 
carcass of a sperm whale, covered in blood, 
smelling of rot, which they installed on 
Scheveningen beach – and in later years 
other beaches all over the world. A team of 
actors was hired to play the roles of scient-
ists, examin ing the mammal’s cadaver. 
 Seinfeld ’s white men were still in time to 
save the whale, but by the time Captain 
Boomer’s men and women in white coats 
arrived they could do little more than grieve 
over it. Th eir sole func tion was docu ment a-
tion, the produc tion and distri bu tion of 
inform a tion, aft er the fact. 
 My argu ment here is twofold. First, I 
argue, like many others, that in the past 
decades, our rela tion ship to the envir on-
ment, beach, whale or else where has 
gradu ally come to occupy the centre stage 
of our imagin a tion. To put it in Williams’s 
terms: it has intens i ﬁ ed from an emer gent 
struc ture of feeling to a domin ant one. I 
guess this much is obvious. More import-
antly, however, I want to argue that the 
nature of our engage ment with the envir-
on ment has changed. Of course, we’ve 
become more serious, but that’s not what I 
mean.  Seinfeld ’s inter ac tion with the 
beach’s ecosys tem was not just humor istic; 
it’s comedy was of a partic u lar register: 
distinctly object- speciﬁ c, local and short- 
lived. It begins and ends with the stran ded 
whale. Th e senti ment in a post- apoca lyptic 
ﬁ lm like  Th e Road  or the install a tion 
 Beached Whale , in contrast, is object less, 
global and protrac ted. In  Th e Road , 
envir on ment al ism is less a response to a 
partic u lar problem than, if you allow me 
to stretch the term, an exper i en tial  a 
priori that informs every possible problem. 
Even the point of  Beached Whale is less 
the image of a dead whale, than it is the 
sense of ﬁ nal ity it implies. Th e plump ness, 
the solem nity, the blood, the rot, the smell, 
the scient ists docu ment ing aft er the fact: 
we’re always already too late. 
 It would be a mistake to say that culture 
has relo cated to the beach. Rather, it’s the 
other way around: the beach, as chro no tope, 
has moved into culture – a sort of chro-
nomove, a chro nomot ive (I wish I had 
inven ted this term, but a quick inter net 
browse suggests it already exists, and even 
appears to be trade marked). Th e number of 
novels in which rising sea levels and super 
storms have pushed the beach into or 
beyond cities like London and New York 
has increased expo nen tially over the past 
decades – I am think ing here again, of the 
likes 
of 
Robinson, 
Bacigalupi 
and 
Houellebecq, but also of the last chapters of 
less obvious choices like T. C. Boyle’s  A 
Friend of the Earth , Margaret Atwood’s  Th e 
Year of the Flood , Jennifer Egan’s novel  A 
Visit from the Goon Squad or David 
Mitchell’s  Th e Bone Clocks . In ﬁ lm, the trope 
of the retreat ing coastal line features in
anything from the block buster disaster ﬂ ick 
 Th e Day Aft er Tomorrow to the inde pend-
ent eco- community feature  Beasts from the 
Southern Wild . An inter est ing example in 
contem por ary art is Olafur Eliasson’s 2010 
install a tion series  Drift wood . In this project, 
the artist distrib utes drift  wood he collec ted 
at the Iceland coast across Berlin. Placing 
the weathered wood at pave ments, round-
abouts, parking areas and alleys in the city, 
he both extends and reverses western 
culture’s Romantic rela tion ship to nature. 
On the one hand, the pieces of drift  wood 
invoke mystery – of origin, of journey, of 
placing. It poses ques tions like: ‘Where are 
these pieces of wood from?’ and ‘How did 
these pieces get here?’ Or, simply: ‘What do 
they mean?’ and ‘What do they invoke?’ On 
the other hand, however, the weathered logs 
also suggest an altern ate hier archy between 
culture and nature, one where Kramer is no 
longer hitting golf balls into the ocean, but 
where the sea is pitch ing them back at us. 
What Eliasson’s install a tions imply here is a 
diﬀ er ent rela tion ship between culture and 
nature, one in which the latter is not an 
external obstacle, or an incor por ated means 
to an end, but always already an integ ral 
part. As Timothy Morton explains so evoc-
at ively in  Th e Ecological Th ought (2010): we 
coexist. It just that we’ve only now real ized 
as much. 
 In his bril liant essay ‘Art and Mood’, 
philo sopher Noel Carroll distin guishes 
between an emotion and a mood. An 
emotion, he writes, is a response to a state 
of aﬀ airs in the world. It is ‘direc ted’ 
towards a partic u lar object, and is short- 
lived. If I am angry, aft er all, the anger is 
related to someone or some thing who has 
angered me. I might well depart with my 
anger if that person apolo gizes. For 
example: I am angry because my partner 
has put the organic waste in the regular bin 
instead of the recyc ling bin. ‘You’, I shout, 
or whisper, or think, depend ing on the 
aﬀ ect ive register of the rela tion ship (maybe 
it’s very repress ive), ‘are killing the planet!’ 
If in response my partner apolo gizes, says, 
‘Oh, sorry, I wasn’t think ing clearly for a 
second there’ (imagine a conver sa tion 
would ever run like that!), chances are I 
forgive that person instantly. An emotion 
is related to an extern al ity that trans gresses 
your aﬀ ect ive bound ar ies, as it were. If it 
retreats, your harmony is restored. 
 A mood, by contrast, Carroll