ECOSOPHY

make up everday life, produ cing the series 
of assemblages in and through which we 
act. (In that sense there is no intrinsic 
diﬀ er ence between modern tech no logy 
and the wheel.) Conceptualizing the mind, 
Bateson thus shows how think ing is neces-
sar ily a rela tional power, a consequence of 
the mater ial assemblage. 
 What thinks and engages in trial and 
error is the man plus the computer plus 
the envir on ment. And the lines between 
man, computer and envir on ment are 
purely arti ﬁ  cial, ﬁ cti tious lines. Th ey are 
lines across the path ways along which 
inform a tion or diﬀ er ence is trans mit ted. 
Th ey are not bound ar ies of the think ing 
system. What thinks is the total system 
which engages in trial and error, which is 
man plus envir on ment. 
 Bateson 1972 : 491 
 Th is wholly other form of ecosophy, in 
which one does not start from  oppos i tions 
between mind and body, man and animal, 
man and nature, nature and culture, tech-
no logy and earth (to name just a few of the 
oppos i tions (impli citly) at work in Crutzen 
and Naess), but instead from  rela tions , 
allows us to analyse the crises of today in a 
completely diﬀ er ent way, if only because 
the role of ecolo gical think ing as such now 
changes from crit ical (oppos i tional) to 
aﬃ  rm at ive (mutual coex istens ive): it is not 
so much in search of answers to prob lems 
posed by our era, but rather searches for 
ways to be inter woven with the move-
ments and the swerves of today. Or better: 
this second form of ecosophy is not so 
much think ing  about ecology but  does 
ecolo gical think ing. Being unlim ited it 
rethinks our era  as a whole , oﬀ er ing us a 
(possibly)  complete philo sophy  and a 
(possibly)  complete idea of what threatens 
peace ful coex ist ence not only between 
people and between states, but between 
everything that matters. Th e analysis by 
Bateson in the early 1970s then oﬀ ers us a 
very diﬀ er ent analysis of envir on mental 
issues or ecolo gical disasters as they are 
called. Bateson explains: 
 Let us now consider what happens when 
you make the epistem o lo gical error of 
choos ing the wrong unit: you end up with 
the species versus the other species 
around it or versus the envir on ment in 
which it oper ates. Man against nature. You 
end up, in fact, with Kaneohe Bay polluted, 
Lake Erie a slimy green mess, and ‘Let’s 
build bigger atom bombs to kill oﬀ  the 
next- door neigh bors.’ Th ere is an ecology 
of bad ideas, just as there is an ecology of 
weeds, and it is char ac ter istic of the 
system that basic error propag ates itself. It 
branches out like a rooted para site 
through the tissues of life, and everything 
get into a rather pecu liar mess. When you 
narrow down your epistem o logy and act 
on the premise ‘What interests me is me, 
or my organ iz a tion, or my species,’ you 
chop oﬀ  consid er a tion of other loops of 
the loop struc ture. You decide that you 
want to get rid of the by- products of 
human life and that Lake Erie will be a 
good place to put them. You forget that 
the eco- mental system called Lake Erie is 
part of your wider eco- mental system – 
and that if Lake Erie is driven insane, its 
insan ity is incor por ated in the larger 
system of your thought and exper i ence. 
 Bateson 1972 : 491–2 
 In the late 1980s, Félix Guattari rewrote 
Bateson’s ecology of mind in his famous 
essay  Th e Th ree Ecologies (1989) expand ing 
on this idea that the three ecolo gical 
registers 
(envir on mental, 
social 
and 
mental ecolo gies) are neces sar ily entwined 
and can only be studied in their entwin-
ings (rela tions). Th e kind of ‘insan ity’ that 
Guattari analyses (‘insan ity’ being a refer-
ence to the excerpt from Bateson above) 
always concerns all these three registers in
their inter con nec ted ness, which means 
that to worry about Lake Erie is also to 
worry about the insan ity that has over-
taken kinship networks, domestic life and 
neigh bour hood rela tions. Or to trans late 
this to our age, the denuded dry land scape 
in inner Syria, and the major urban iz a tion 
that followed cannot be seen as separ ate 
from the current civil war. 
 Especially in the post–2008 land scape, 
where a series of crises have surfaced and 
seem to hold the world in a tight grip 
(ecolo gical, econom ical and geopol it ical) a 
Batesoninan/Guattarian analysis of the 
ecolo gical and posthu man mind seems to 
be more needed than ever. Yet even in the 
late 1980s and the early 1990s Guattari 
himself noticed that we are running out of 
time: ‘Now more than ever, nature cannot 
be separ ated from culture; in order to 
compre hend the inter ac tions between 
ecosys tems, the mechano sphere and the 
social and indi vidual Universes of refer-
ence, we must learn to think “trans vers-
ally” ’ (2000: 29). 
 It is depress ing to conclude that these 
altern at ive ways of think ing ecology, as 
they have been developed by great minds 
like Bateson and Guattari, are only now, 
decades aft er their writ ings, being heard in 
a series of schol arly move ments that are 
increas ingly worried about the ongoing 
reign of the human ism. Th irty- ﬁ ve years 
aft er Bateson, twenty- ﬁ ve years aft er 
Guattari, think ing trans vers ally, think ing 
the social, the mental  and the envir on-
mental as ‘one’, has only just begun. Th e 
conclu sion can only be bitter, as Michel 
Serres tells us: ‘We will pay for this blind-
ness’ (2009/2014: 19). 
 See also Animism (Limulus); Ecopathy; 
Ecologies of Architecture; General Ecology; 
Planetary; Urbanibalism. 
 Rick Dolphijn 
 EPIGENETIC LANDSCAPE  
 Th e epigen etic land scape origin ated as a 
char coal drawing by the British land scape 
artist John Piper, commis sioned in 1940 by 
British embry olo gist- genet i cist Conrad Hall 
Waddington to be used as the frontis piece 
to his volume  Organisers and Genes . Th is 
precursor work in the ﬁ eld of epigen et ics 
examined the processes govern ing embry-
olo gical diﬀ er en ti ation and the role of genes 
in guiding devel op ment. Waddington inten-
ded the image of the epigen etic land scape 
to repres ent the devel op mental process 
(common to all euka ryotic species, that is 
species with cells and cell nuclei) through 
which a pluri po tent cell devel ops, over the 
course of inter ac tions with its envir on ment, 
to its speciﬁ c, diﬀ er en ti ated cell fate. 
 Pause for a moment to assim il ate this 
inform a tion: this scientiﬁ c model of devel-
op mental processes was origin ally a work 
of art. C. H. Waddington selec ted it – 
rather than a forking path, train diagram, 
tree diagram or any of the other possible 
scientiﬁ c repres ent a tions of devel op ment – 
to capture an essen tial aspect of animal life: 
how devel op ment progresses from geno type 
to phen o type, or from the hered it ary genetic 
make- up to one speciﬁ c morpho logy. Aft er 
this initial image, which he commis sioned 
during the London Blitz (and there is a story 
there, still to be told), Waddington moved 
away from artistic repres ent a tions, though he 
also considered and discarded other visual 
models for devel op ment. Instead, by 1957 he 
had settled on the schem atic repres ent a tion 
of the epigen etic land scape with which we 
are most famil iar today, an engrav ing- like 
image pictur ing a ball near the top of a hill 
ﬁ ssured with chan nels that extend from 
the top to the bottom. In Waddington’s 
schema, the ball is a fertil ized egg cell, and 
the hills and valleys indic ate not only the 
diﬀ er ent direc tions the devel op ing cell 
might take as it diﬀ er en ti ates, but also the
EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL THINKING) 
to that ulti mate cell fate. 
 Th e ﬁ eld Waddington founded, epigen et-
ics, drew together the insights of embry-
ology, the emer ging ﬁ eld of genet ics and 
evol u tion ary theory to explore morpho gen-
esis: how it was that an indi vidual organ ism 
developed from the hered it ary genome. 
Although research ers now examine the 
inter ac tion between the indi vidual and the 
envir on ment in ﬁ elds as wide spread as envir-
on mental toxic o logy, pren atal medi cine, 
nutri tion, psychi atry and cancer biology, the 
applic a tion of epigen et ics in these ﬁ elds 
reveals an epistem o lo gical narrow ing of the 
concept to a focus on gene activ a tion. Yet 
when naming this new ﬁ eld, Waddington 
borrowed the ‘epi-’ from the old term ‘epigen-
esis’, to emphas ize that the ﬁ eld was also 
concerned with aspects of devel op ment that 
lay beyond, over, or above the gene. 
 Th e epigen etic land scape image lost 
currency in the late 1960s to be replaced with 
the more precise notion of  DNA as code. Yet 
this image merits re- exam in a tion. As it was 
concep tu al ized, the epigen etic land scape 
linked time and space: the time it takes for 
some thing to develop from its pluri po tent to 
its diﬀ er en ti ated state, and the role of 
elements above the genes, the cell, even the 
envir on ment around the organ ism, in the 
devel op ment of new life. Although the young 
Waddington was inter ested in morpho gen-
esis – the explan a tion for how life took 
speciﬁ c form – because of his years of exper-
i ments on chick embryos, in his later years 
he under stood that the model for morpho-
gen esis embed ded in the epigen etic land-
scape could stretch beyond the indi vidual to 
the envir on mental and social. He exten ded 
the applic a tion of this image to express not 
merely the course of one cell’s devel op ment 
or the prob ab il ity that the cell would, over 
time, develop in one direc tion or another, but 
also the forces explain ing devel op ment and 
evol u tion of the natural and social envir on-
ments. As a core inﬂ u ence on the devel op-
ment of René Th om’s cata strophe theory, the 
epigen etic land scape can be under stood as 
an early model of the non- linear rela tions 
of the posthu man era, in which algorithms 
model the devel op ment of complex systems, 
linking 
indi vidu als, 
species, 
economic 
markets and the global climate. 
 Why return to this image aban doned in 
the rush to under stand genom ics and most 
recently epige n om ics? We might explore why 
this embry olo gist/geolo gist chose a work of 
art for his found a tional intel lec tual image, 
and why the abstract and schem atic graphic 
to which he then turned achieved great 
currency in the life sciences in the period just 
before the rise of the era of the gene as code. 
We might wonder what was lost with the 
turn to that second image, that ball on a 
ﬁ ssured hill that has become the classic 
version of the epigen etic land scape. What 
ecolo gies did Waddington invoke when he 
chose to repres ent the rela tion ship between 
gene and envir on ment unfold ing in the 
temporal course of devel op ment as a  land-
scape ? Did the epigen etic land scape contrib-
ute to our current vision of a general ecology? 
While the epigen etic land scape is currently 
under active recon cep tu al iz a tion across the 
life sciences, where it is serving less as a 
source of scientiﬁ c content than as a meth od-
o lo gical prompt, its form and func tion in the 
human it ies has yet to be explored. In that role 
we may indeed ﬁ nd its most power ful legacy. 
 See also Algorithm; Animal; Art; General 
Ecology. 
 Susan M. Squier 
 EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL 
THINKING)  
 Th e notion of ‘equa tion’ is relev ant to a 
posthu man gloss ary in that it illu min ates the
EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL THINKING)