ETHEREAL SCENT

of human ity seem to disap pear. Th e tight 
costumes they wear, the sunglasses they use 
to shield their pure souls from the false truth 
of the hyper real ity, and the super hu man 
forces they exhibit, mirror the power ful and 
eﬃ   cient systems they ﬁ ght. But even in this 
arti ﬁ  cial world of the matrix their human ity 
reveals itself through smell. While inter rog-
at ing a heavily sweat ing Morpheus, Agent 
Smith confesses he partic u larly can’t stand 
the smell of humans: ‘I feel satur ated by it. I 
can taste your stink. And every time I do I 
feel I have somehow been infec ted by it. It’s 
repuls ive, isn’t it?’ Th at there is no such thing 
as smell in the matrix makes this fact even 
more signi ﬁ c ant. Humanity, unboun ded by a 
biolo gical body, fragrantly satur ates all 
possible nodes of the network computer 
systems that construct the matrix. 
 Smell is an integ ral part of the body but 
also separ ate from it. Th at char ac ter istic 
makes it the ideal vessel to tran scend oneself. 
Since antiquity, perfume has always had a 
tran scend ental func tion. In ancient Egypt 
smell played an import ant role in rituals. 
Th e gods were considered to be fragrant 
beings. Besides, smell was considered to 
have protect ive worth. Th e well- known wax 
cones the Egyptians wore on their heads 
fulﬁ lled a ritual value. Th ey guided the 
spirits of the deceased in their trans ition to 
the world of the dead. In the Middle Ages, 
smell was also a means to contact the super-
nat ural. Art histor ian Caro Verbeek argues 
that the incense diﬀ used during holy mass 
was a spir itual medium. To the twelft h- 
century mystic Hildegard von Bingen, 
smoke was the most appro pri ate means to 
commu nic ate with God because – just like 
Him – it is invis ible and it exceeds our intel-
lect. 3 Today we see a revival of this spir itual 
power of fragrance in ether eal oils, scented 
candles, aroma ther apy and potpourri mixes 
used in new- age-styled faith. Smell plays an 
import ant part in self- healing and the spir-
itual cleans ing of the home. Th e aromas that 
are used in these  rituals are oft en synthetic 
deriv at ives of the smell of the wild. Th ey 
create a better, more intense and controlled 
(i.e. hyper real) exper i ence of nature than 
real nature. And in their intens ity they create 
an immers ive exper i ence similar to the one 
gener ated by the matrix. But whereas the 
cine matic exper i ence is mostly visual, this 
one uses fragrance to trans port the body to 
other spheres, as was done in the exper i-
ments with smell in the cinema from the 
early 1900s onwards. From Hans Laube’s 
patent for Smell-O-Vision and Morton 
Heilig’s Sensorama to the virtual reality 
systems of the nineties designed to eﬀ ect-
ively immerse gamers, and the more recent 
smell- o-internet or i- smell and o- phone, 4 
they all turned to smell as the next level in 
creat ing simu la tions that give an exper i ence 
that is more real than reality. 
 Th is 
sens it iv ity 
to 
the 
embod ied 
human exper i ence was lost during the 
Enlightenment. Descartes separ ated body 
and mind and in this act created the modern 
human subject that can perceive, know and 
rule the world by the power of the ratio. Th e 
matrix as inform a tional space is a contem-
por ary repres ent a tion of this world of the 
mind. However, just as Neo as ‘Th e One’ 
even tu ally succeeds in uniting body and 
mind, nature and culture, biology and tech-
no logy, today in our tech no lo gical society 
we see a reappraisal for the body as it is 
deﬁ ned as an inform a tion processing 
system. Th e body as inform a tion is no longer 
cent rally organ ized by the ratio of the indi-
vidual subject. Just as the other inform a tion 
processing systems, as wetware it is part of 
the  infosphere . As such it can be regu lated 
and adapted by means of biotech no logy. In 
this sphere, smell is one of the signals that 
can be coded, manip u lated and networked. 
Th e prot ag on ists in science ﬁ ction ﬁ lms still 
stank. Th e posthu man, as hybrid species 
between biology and tech no logy, creates its 
own atmo sphere to design itself and to
commu nic ate with other human and non- 
human creatures in its network. 
 See also Sensing Practices; Art; Post-
humanism; Noise.