EXPULSIONS

capita. But it actu ally destroys the land 
rather quickly and buries the know ledge of 
small hold ers about how to ensure a long 
life for land (notably, rotat ing crops that 
ensure fertil ity and minim ize pests). 
Similarly in urban econom ies, repla cing 
mom and pop shops (for selling ﬂ owers, or 
food, or a good latte) with a corpor ate 
outlet sucks know ledge (it takes know-
ledge and exper i ence to run a mom and 
pop shop) and proﬁ ts out of the local ity 
and passes it on to central headquar ters. 
Th e local ity loses capab il it ies and, further-
more, part of its collect ive consump tion 
capa city goes to headquar ters rather than 
re- circu lat ing in the local ity. Corporate 
headquar ters make gains. And these gains, 
further, can trans late into posit ive valu-
ations of their shares in the stock market. 
Th is shift  is meas ured as a growth in  GDP 
per capita so experts and govern ments see 
it as a posit ive. 
 Th ese examples illus trate one aspect of 
what I mean by the systemic edge: it is that 
point in a process when our exist ing 
categor ies (analyt ical, concep tual, stat ist-
ical) can no longer capture what is going 
on. Th ere are simple and there are complex 
instan ti ations. 
 Th e second major domain where I 
deploy this type of analyt ics concerns the 
biosphere. 3 Th e biosphere’s capa cit ies to 
renew land, water, and air are remark able. 
But they are predic ated on speciﬁ c tempor-
al it ies and life cycles that our tech nical, 
chem ical and organ iz a tional innov a tions 
are 
rapidly 
outpa cing. 
Industrialized 
econom ies have long done damage to the 
biosphere, but in at least some of these 
cases, and with time on her side, the 
biosphere has brought damaged land and 
water back to health. Current analyses and 
eval u ations signal that we have gone well 
beyond this capa city for recov ery in a 
growing range of condi tions. We now have 
vast stretches of land and water that are 
not merely damaged but plain dead – land 
over whelmed by the relent less use of 
chem ic als, and water dead from lack of 
oxygen due to pollu tion of all sorts. Th e 
surge of foreign land acquis i tions by 
govern ments and ﬁ rms examined above is 
one of many
clin ic ally dead oceanic coastal zones. We 
made this fragil ity and these deaths. 
 We can think of such dead land and 
dead water as holes in the tissue of the 
biosphere. And the edges of these holes are 
also systemic – they tell us some thing that 
is larger than the partic u lar site. I conceive 
of these holes as sites marked by the expul-
sion of biospheric elements from their life 
space, and as the surface expres sion of 
deeper subter ranean trends that are cutting 
across the world, regard less of the local 
type of politico- economic organ iz a tion. 
 As I examine at length in  Expulsions 
( Sassen 2014 ), we have collect ively 
produced condi tions that over ride national 
diﬀ er ences: my guiding concep tual eﬀ ort 
through out the exam in a tion of concrete 
cases across our planet was to make visible 
the 
recur rence 
of 
envir on ment ally 
destruct ive modes no matter how diverse 
the polit ical econom ies and polit ical 
systems in play. Together and over time, we 
have gener ated a plan et ary condi tion that 
reaches far beyond the speciﬁ c