EXTENDED COGNITION

( Clark and Chalmers 1998 ). Th is stand-
point is that of active exter n al ism and 
reson ates with theor ies of embod ied (e.g. 
 Wilson and Foglia 2016 ), embed ded 
( Suchman 1987 ;  Hutchins 1995 ), enact ive 
( Varela, Th ompson and Rosch 1991 ) and 
situ ated cogni tion ( Smith 1999 ;  Robbins 
and Aydede 2009 ). Such a view of cogni-
tion not only has implic a tions for research 
in cognit ive science, robot ics and arti ﬁ  cial 
intel li gence but also chal lenges indi vidu al-
istic under stand ing of cogni tion as taking 
place exclus ively in the brain or even 
brain- body. To an extent that this model 
blurs the bound ar ies between tech nical 
objects and human agents in the domain 
of cogni tion, the exten ded mind thesis also 
ques tions the human excep tion al ism and 
anthro po centrism inher ent in more tradi-
tional cognit ive sciences. 
 Th e exten ded mind thesis was intro-
duced by Andy Clark and David Chalmers 
in their article ‘Th e Extended Mind’ in 
1998. In their essay they propose that reli-
ance on envir on mental support in some 
cases produces ‘epistemic actions’: actions 
that alter the world so as to aid and 
augment cogni tion ( Clark and Chalmers 
1998 ). Th is leads them to propose that 
such actions should also deserve epistemic 
credit: ‘if, as we confront some task, a part 
of the world func tions as a process which, 
 were it done in the head , we would have 
no hesit a tion in recog niz ing as part of the 
cognit ive process, then that part of the 
world  is . . . part of the cognit ive process’ 
(ibid.: 8). Th e latter is also what was coined 
as the ‘parity prin ciple’, which helps deﬁ ne 
when cogni tion is exten ded. Such exten-
ded minds are, in fact, cognit ive systems, 
where all elements play an active causal 
role, 
continu ously 
inﬂ u en cing 
and 
respond ing to one another and thus 
coordin at ing to produce beha viour ( Clark 
1997 ). 
 Clark and Chalmer’s essay consti tutes 
the basis of what is called the ‘ﬁ rst wave’ of 
argu ments for  EC , mostly based on the 
above- mentioned parity prin ciple ( Menary 
2010 ). Th e second wave of argu ments is 
developed in closer orient a tion to empir-
ical and enact ive approaches (see, for 
instance,  Sutton 2010 ;  Menary 2007 and 
 2010 ; 
 Wilson 
2010 ; 
 Wheeler 
2010 ; 
 Malafouris 
2013 ). 
Second- wave 
 EC 
thinkers high light that external elements 
and processes can diﬀ er dramat ic ally from 
internal ones ( Sutton 2010 ), and this diﬀ er-
ence is, in fact, required in order for 
‘external’ and ‘internal’ compon ents of the 
cognit ive process to be comple ment ary 
( Rowlands 2010a ) and integ rated into the 
cognit ive system ( Menary 2010 ). Finally, a 
third wave of argu ments is emer ging as 
well, focus sing on what Sutton calls ‘a 
deter rit ori al ized cognit ive science’ ( Sutton 
2010 ,  2013 ) that goes beyond the bound ar-
ies of biolo gical organ ism and deals rather 
with cognit ive assem blies in which none of 
the elements have analyt ical prior ity, as 
well as with ques tions of trans form a tion 
that occurs due to processes of exten sion 
and coup ling ( Kirchhoﬀ  2012 ). 
 One of the tradi tional lines of critique 
towards  EC is based on the claim that  EC 
performs a coup ling- consti tu tion fallacy: 
the fact that agents rely on certain external 
objects for cognit ive purposes, thus being in 
eﬀ ect cognit ively coupled with the object, 
does not mean that the object in ques tion 
consti tutes a part of the agent’s cognit ive 
appar atus (see, for instance,  Adams and 
Aizawa 2008 ,  2010 ). While this and similar 
critiques imply prior it iz ing clear bound ar-
ies of cogni tion and clear indic a tion of 
cognit ive agents, other crit ical voices 
suggest that  EC does not go far enough in 
dethron ing the biolo gic ally delin eated 
human as the main agent of cogni tion. 
For instance, Di Paolo ( 2009 ) proposes 
that in order to do away with biolo gical
chau vin ism and human- centred ness, an 
auto poi etic enact iv ist account of cogni tion 
is needed that would posi tion cogni tion 
as a rela tional phenomenon that emerges 
between autopoi etic systems and their 
inter ac tions with envir on ment. In this way 
a non- species-speciﬁ c deﬁ n i tion of cogni-
tion, agency and medi ation could be 
developed that does not completely deny 
the exten ded mind thesis. Kirchhoﬀ  ( 2012 ) 
also suggests that  EC should be pushed 
towards a deter rit ori al ized cognit ive science 
that dissolves the indi vidual and displaces 
agency, instead of marking it as an indi-
vidual (human?) prop erty. Th e ques tion of 
agency was also taken up by theor ists such 
as Wheeler, who asks what happens when 
tech no lo gies that are part of our cognit ive 
appar atus start exhib it ing agency them-
selves (see, for instance,  Wheeler 2011 ). All 
in all,  EC theory is import ant not only 
for cognit ive science and its methods 
(Should the object of study be indi vidual 
agents or cognit ive systems? Should we 
consider conscious ness as exten ded? See, 
for instance,  Rowlands 2010a ,  2010b on 
this ques tion) but also opens up new direc-
tions in arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence and robot ics 
research (via focus on inter act ive learn ing 
and react ive or beha viour- based robot ics; 
see  Brooks 2002 on the latter). 
 See also Artiﬁ cial Intelligence; Execution; 
Plasticity; Neocybernetics; Robophilosophy. 
 Goda Klumbytė 
 EXTINCTION  
 Extinction is at once the most human and 
the most inhuman of concepts. Th e very 
possib il ity of this contrary tend ency is the 
hall mark of our most fragile and most 
robust present. Th e twenty- ﬁ rst century is 
at one and the same time marked by a 
sense of impend ing human extinc tion 
(both liter ally, with the biolo gical species 
coming to an end, and ﬁ gur at ively, with all 
that passes itself oﬀ  as human facing anni-
hil a tion by way of tech no lo gical, ecolo gical 
and polit ical cata strophe);  and  at the same 
time human ity has declared itself to be a 
geolo gical force with the power and will to 
recog nize and reverse the changes it has 
made to the Earth as a living system. In 
what follows I outline three artic u la tions 
of the concept of extinc tion, all of which 
are inex tric ably inter twined with the 
problem of the human. 
 First, and most obvi ously, extinc tion 
announces itself today as the sixth great 
mass extinc tion. Humans are at once 
threatened by this mass extinc tion event at 
the same time as they contrib ute to the 
accel er a tion of this extinc tion, and have 
done so since the earli est days of human 
migra tion ( Diamond 1989 ). Th e current 
era of intense anthro po genic climate 
change, along with the declar a tion of the 
Anthropocene, seems to have enabled a 
shift  in degree that has ulti mately gener-
ated a diﬀ er ence in kind. Extinction may 
have been as much a part of life as growth, 
decay, muta tion and prolif er a tion, but it 
may also be that extinc tion reaches a 
threshold and rate that gener ates a new 
dynamic between life and loss. ‘Mass 
extinc tion’ far exceeds the ‘back ground 
rate’ of the ebb and ﬂ ow of life’s creation 
and destruc tion but there are never the less 
diﬀ er ent ways one can mark the threshold 
between extinc tion as part of the dynam ics 
of life, and massive losses of species and 
biod iversity ( Wang 2003 ). 
 Extinction is as natural and inev it able 
as emer gence, but it may be that when 
extinc tion can be witnessed from within 
‘a’ life that this aspect of exist ence opens a 
new way of prob lem at iz ing the limits of 
think ing and what it might mean to mourn 
or save a form of life. Having emerged