EXTINCTION

suﬀ er ing from obesity, hyper- consump tion 
and stim u lus- over load. (One might concur 
here with McKenzie Wark ( 2015a ), who 
argues for a nature without ecology.) 
Th is post- apoca lyptic land scape is media- 
deprived, all of the archive left  in tatters, 
bereft  of shop ping, art galler ies or leisure 
indus tries. It is a world that one might 
think of as dysto pian and post- apoca lyptic 
 if what makes life worth living is reﬂ ect ive 
human reason and hyper- consump tion 
groun ded in a speciﬁ c archive. Th is world 
at the end of the world is perhaps, if one 
takes away the disdain ful ‘ﬁ rst- world’ 
framing, what a great deal of beings have 
known and respect fully lived  as life. If one 
thinks about extinc tion beyond species- 
fetish ism one might think of other modes 
of exist ence (that might survive what ‘we’ 
can only imagine as the end of the world) 
as the begin ning of new worlds. 
 See also Ahuman; Expulsions; Food; 
Survival; Necropolitics; Capitalocene and 
Chthulucene; Rewilding. 
 Claire Colebrook  Trevor Paglen,  Trinity 
Cube , 2015, irra di ated glass from the 
Fukushima Exclusion Zone, Trinitite, 
20 × 20 × 20 cm. COURTESY OF THE ARTIST AND 
DON’T FOLLOW THE WIND.
active- points, which insert femin ist ideas, 
designs, inform a tion and mean ings into 
the main stream commons. Feminicity is a 
spec u lat ive tool, creat ive of new signi ﬁ  ers 
of being and new data content with speciﬁ c 
femin ist- oriented goals. Th ere is an expli-
cit refer ence and critique of gender ing 
insti tu tions in actions of Feminicity. 
Active- points of Feminicity gener ate 
speciﬁ c ally femin ist- oriented dataﬁ c a tion, 
where the content injec ted into the system 
will demand resourcing from all areas of 
society and culture. Speculating on exist-
ing mater ial onto lo gies and gener at ing 
active- aﬀ ects, Feminicity works to manip-
u late the algorithmic ideo lo gies of capit al-
ist nihil istic and narciss istic beha viours, 
opening new real it ies. 
 Th e kinds of rela tion ships produced by 
inform a tion and commu nic a tion tech no-
lo gies and their inter ac tions with vernacu-
lar exper i ences and events enable dynamic 
cultural and polit ical condi tions and emer-
gent beha viours. Individuals, collect ives 
and cultures can be mobil ized or frac tured 
through such changes and the speeds of 
those changes. When the second- wave 
femin ist move ment plugged into the 
digital era of the 1990s, new femin ist 
ethical modes were gener ated through this 
inter ac tion between femin ism and digital 
tech no lo gies (cf.  Haraway 1991 ;  Hayles 
 F  
1999 ;  Wajcman 2004 ). Th is connec tion of 
second- wave femin ist and digital media 
high lighted the gender- bias of the notion 
of ‘neutral’ tech no lo gies, and the so- called 
‘net- neut ral ity’ of the digital market. Th e 
cultures created from this connec tion 
between inform a tion tech no lo gies and 
femin ism produced not just another 
language or series of stand points (cf. 
 Harding 1986 ,  2004 ;  Hayles 2002 ;  Plant 
1997 ), rather emer gent sets of femin ist 
prac tices were given form, chan ging deﬁ n-
i tions of norm at ive ‘natur al ized’ racial, 
sexual and social rela tions ( Braidotti 2013 : 
99), enabling a re- imagin ing of the mater-
ial actions and consequences of inform a-
tion, and the epoch of Digital Feminicity 
began. Historically, changes in know ledge 
forms are polit ic ally aligned, accord ing 
to the contexts through which they are 
produced, main tained and distrib uted. 
But in the global digital commons, the 
ques tion arises as to what is the extent of 
ethic ally posit ive change to the capit al ist 
‘norm at ive’ refer en tial frame works that 
actions of Feminicity achieve? 
 Active- points of Feminicity are found 
in the prac tices and activ it ies from the 
sciences, human it ies and creat ive arts that 
create, identify and analyse, through the 
emer gent beha viours gener ated between 
femin isms and the digital spheres. Th ese 
action- points use theor et ical and phys ical 
forms to mater i al ize their femin ist agency. 
Th ere are examples to be found in and 
across all discip lin ary ﬁ elds: the sciences, 
human it ies and the arts. Th e art collect ive