INTRODUCTION

angles and creat ive insights about aﬀ ect 
that are emer ging between theory, science 
and the arts. Our authors argue that these 
domains combine forces in address ing the 
chal lenge of our collect ive ‘ecopathy’. Or, 
to para phrase Donna Haraway: why are 
the machines so lively and the humans so 
inert? 
 Th e  Posthuman Glossary attempts to 
strike a balance between these multiple 
theor et ical lines, swinging moods and 
over- active inter dis cip lin ary hubs. Th e 
volume wants to think about and high light 
the inter con nec tion between our fascin a-
tion for novel tech no lo gical arte facts, 
envir on mental 
degrad a tion, 
economic 
dispar it ies, struc tural injustice and the 
recru des cence 
of 
power 
diﬀ er ences 
claimed to have been left  behind. In other 
words, the passion that sustains this 
volume is essen tially ethical: how can we 
come to terms with the breath tak ing trans-
form a tions of our times while being able to 
endure and to resist? How to keep in mind 
issues of social, femin ist, queer, trans, 
deco lo nial, anti- racist, inter- species, dis-
abil ity and transna tional justice while 
keeping pace with the amazing bio- 
scientiﬁ c, media and commu nic a tion, and 
the cognit ive tech no lo gical advances of 
our times? 
 Faced with such complex ity and the 
wealth of new perspect ives emer ging 
from posthu man invest ig a tions, another 
crucial ques tion that emerges from this 
gloss ary is whether multiple forms of 
altern at ive human isms – of the non-
Western; non- liberal; non- masculin ist; 
non- hetero sex ist; 
non- anthro po centric 
and non- imper ial kind – are feas ible today. 
And how would these inspir ing but poten-
tially contra dict ory approaches fare in the 
conﬂ ic tual geo- polit ical forum of today’s 
world? 
 Asking these ques tions across the 
multiple axes, the prolif er at ing gloss ar ies 
which induces addict ive habits of repe ti-
tion without diﬀ er ence. Deleuze and 
Guattari’s critique of capit al ism as schizo-
phrenia (1980) is a highly relev ant analysis 
of this perverse polit ical economy. 
 Th e posthu man is not only a mode of 
crit ical thought, but also a mood of aﬀ ect-
ive belong ing. It intro duces a multi- faceted 
‘aﬀ ect ive turn’ that combines emotions 
usually held as oppos ites: nostal gia with 
the passion for utopian vision; the polit ics 
of life itself with the spectre of mass extinc-
tion; 
melan cho lia 
with 
anti cip a tion; 
mourn ing for the past with a brutal ist 
passion for the not- yet. In this respect, 
Pathos and Th anatos stare at each other in 
the eyes while Eros looks away. Th e 
 Posthuman Glossary is as much a rhet or-
ical and aesthetic explor a tion of the 
posthu man condi tion as a literal descrip-
tion of its deﬁ n ing features and analytic 
condi tions of possib il ity. Th e eco- elegiac 
tone of some of our contrib ut ors is echoed 
by the ﬂ air for ‘eco- horror’ expressed by 
others. New aﬀ ects require new languages: 
what do you call that haunt ing feeling of 
ecolo gical memor ies of land scapes trans-
ﬁ gured by violent devel op ment? Eco- 
nostal gia? Remembrance of trees past? 
Geo- phys ical semi ot ics? Portrait of a 
young waste land? Colonial trans ﬁ g ur a-
tions? Scar wars? Terrestrial deli rium? And 
how should we describe that sinking 
feeling at the thought of the unsus tain ab il-
ity of our future? Post- anthro po centric 
nausea? Extinction- attrac tion syndrome? 
Global obscen it ies over load? No country 
for any human? 
 Th e aﬀ ect ive dimen sion is central to 
the aims of the  Posthuman Glossary and 
cannot be separ ated from concep tual 
creativ ity. In an era that is increas ingly 
deﬁ ned by the critique of anthro po centric 
apathy and the recog ni tion of the vital ity 
of matter and of non- human agency, this 
book wants to explore the new crit ical
contrib ute a ﬁ rst set of premises towards 
that kind of dialogue.