MAKEHUMAN

Software: We’ve Got a 
Situation Here  
 MakeHuman is ‘3D computer graph ics 
middle ware designed for the proto typ ing 
of photo real istic humanoids’ and has 
gained visib il ity and popular ity over time. 4 
It is actively developed by a collect ive of 
program mers, algorithms, model lers and 
academ ics and used by amateur anim at ors 
to proto type model ling, by natural history 
museums for creat ing exhib i tion displays, 
by engin eers to test multi- camera systems 
and by game developers for sketch ing 
bespoke char ac ters. 5   Developers and users 
evid ently work together to deﬁ ne and 
codify the condi tions of pres ence for 
virtual bodies in MakeHuman. 6 Since each 
of the agents in this collect ive somehow 
oper ates under the modern regime of 
repres ent a tion, we ﬁ nd the soft  ware full 
of assump tions about the natur al ity of 
perspect ive- based and linear repres ent a-
tions, the essen tial prop er ties of the species 
and so forth. Th e device ful naming of the 
project is a reminder of how the semi otic- 
mater ial secrets of life’s ﬂ ows are strongly 
linked to the way soft  ware repres ents or 
allows bodies to be repres en ted. 7 Th e 
modern subject, deﬁ ned by the freedom to 
make and decide, is trained to self- 
construct under the narciss istic fantasy of 
‘correct’, ‘proper’ or ‘accur ate’ repres ent a-
tions of the self. Th ese virtual bodies 
matter to us because their persist ent 
repres ent a tions cause mirror aﬀ ects and 
eﬀ ects on both sides of the screen.  8 
 MAKEHUMAN  
 MakeHuman is an Open Source soft -
ware  for model ling three- dimen sional 
humanoid 
char ac ters 
( http://www.
make hu man.org ). Th rough its curious 
naming the project evokes the demi urge, 
dream ing of ‘making’ ‘humans’ to resemble 
his own image. Including a concrete soft -
ware object in this gloss ary means address-
ing speciﬁ c entan gle ments of tech no logy, 
repres ent a tion and norm ativ ity: a potent 
triangle that MakeHuman sits in the 
middle of. But it does not only deserve 
our atten tion due to the tech no lo gical 
power of self- repres ent a tion that it 
aﬀ ords. As an Open Source project, it is 
shaped by the condi tions of inter rog a tion 
and trans form ab il ity, guar an teed through 
its license. Like many other F/ LOSS  
projects, MakeHuman is surroun ded by 
a rich constel la tion of textual objects, 
expressed through publicly access ible 
source code, code- comments, bugtrack ers, 
forums and docu ment a tion. 1 Th is porous-
ness facil it ated the shaping of a collect ive 
inquiry, activ ated through exper i ments, 
conver sa tions and medi ations. 2 In collab-
or a tion with archi tects, dancers, trans*-
activ ists, design students, anim at ors and 
others, we are turning MakeHuman into 
a  think ing machine , a device to crit ic ally 
think along phys ical and virtual imagin-
aries. Soft ware is culture and hence soft -
ware- making is world- making. It is a 
means for rela tion al it ies, not a crys tal lized 
cultural end. 3 
 M