NATURECULTURES

from an agnostic stand point (cf.  Latour 
and Woolgar [1979] 1986 ). 
 Haraway ( 2003 : 2) writes in the opening 
section of  Th e Companion Species Manifesto : 
‘In layers of history, layers of biology, layers 
of nature cul tures, complex ity is the name of 
our game.’ And in addi tion to complex ity, 
nature cul tures are about emer gence. Th e 
complex ity of nature cul tures points at the 
impossib il ity of separ at ing domains such as 
history and biology in tech nos cience and 
every day life alike. Any biolo gical ques tion 
has an imme di ate histor ical dimen sion and 
any histor ical issue is entangled with bio-
lo gical processes and phenom ena.  Th e 
Companion Species Manifesto  explains this 
state of entan gle ment through the example 
of how dogs and humans relate on the West 
Coast of the United States. Both dogs and 
humans have played their part in histor ies 
of colon iz a tion and colon iz ing processes 
have aﬀ ected dog–dog, dog–sheep, dog–
human, human–human and many other 
relat ings. All of these are still ongoing on 
the many entangled layers of history and 
biology in the twenty- ﬁ rst century (cf. 
 DeLanda 2000 ). 
 We Have Never Been Modern presents 
Latour’s theory of modern ity as a process 
whose ‘text book 
version’ 
has 
never 
happened in actu al ity. In actu al ity, any 
process of modern iz a tion is at least double: 
 Modernity is oft en deﬁ ned in terms of 
human ism, either as a way of salut ing the 
birth of ‘man’ or as a way of announ cing 
his death. But this habit itself is modern, 
 NATURECULTURES  
 Th e concepts of ‘nature cul tures’ and 
‘natures- cultures’ both denote the onto lo-
gical prior ity of relat ings over related 
beings and domains of being. Prioritizing 
relat ings entails a perspect ive on the 
coming into being of bounded subjects, 
objects and domains such as the natural 
and the cultural. Priority is given to study-
ing how, where and for whom bound ar ies 
are drawn. Bounded domains of being as 
well as the beings within them are said to be 
end results of complex relat ings. In these 
relat ings both bound ar ies between separ ate 
domains and indi vidual beings come about 
as well as the rela tions among domains and 
the rela tions among beings emerge. More 
oft en than not such rela tions emerge as 
hier arch ical. Th erefore, nature(s-)cultures 
have to do with onto logy, epistem o logy and 
ethics. 
 Th e gene a logy of the concept of nature-
cul tures diﬀ ers slightly from the gene a logy 
of natures- cultures. Th e ﬁ rst concept 
(nature cul tures) is Donna Haraway’s and 
stands in the tradi tion of femin ist and 
anti- racist schol ar ship into tech nos cience 
and (or: as) every day life. Th e term features 
prom in ently in  Th e Companion Species 
Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Signiﬁ cant 
Otherness ( Haraway 2003 ). Th e second 
concept of natures- cultures comes from 
Bruno Latour’s book  We Have Never Been 
Modern ([1991] 1993) and is based in 
science and tech no logy studies as the 
anthro po lo gical study of ‘labor at ory life’ 
 N