PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
XENOFEMINISM

struggle – a struggle that will not end 
until char ac ter ist ics now unevenly loaded 
with social stigma are preven ted from 
furnish ing a basis for asym met rical power 
rela tions. 
 Such a project of dismant ling tech no-
pol it ical, socio- embod ied matrices of 
discrim in a tion is buttressed by a set of 
ideas about the generic. Xenofeminism is 
quite expli cit about this, recog niz ing that 
‘the viab il ity of eman cip at ory abol i tion ist 
projects – the abol i tion of class, gender, and 
race – hinges on a profound rework ing of 
the univer sal’ ( Laboria Cuboniks 2015 ). It 
is here that the import ance of polit ic ally 
refus ing the paro chial univer sal becomes 
partic u larly appar ent. It is no good aspir ing 
to abolish a range of traits that act as 
lever age points for preju di cial power if 
this abol i tion leads only to the trap of 
‘bloated, unmarked partic u lars – namely 
Eurocentric univer sal ism’ (ibid.). It is for this 
reason that xenofem in ism insists upon agit-
at ing for an inter sec tional univer sal, where 
inter sec tion al ity is under stood not as the 
‘morcel la tion of collect ives into a static 
fuzz of cross- refer enced iden tit ies, but [as] a 
polit ical orient a tion that slices through every 
partic u lar, refus ing the crass pigeon hol ing 
of bodies’ (ibid.). A more univer sal univer-
sal, then, oﬀ ers substan tial polit ical aﬀ ord-
ances for eman cip at ory gender projects, 
and is in fact a prerequis ite for imagin ing a 
post- abol i tion moment to come. 
 Th e ﬁ nal point that I want to make 
about the univer sal as an activ ist tool 
speaks to issues of scale and resist ance. In 
the mani festo, Laboria Cuboniks write 
that ‘whilst capit al ism is under stood as a 
complex and ever- expand ing total ity, many 
would- be 
eman cip at ory 
anti- capit al ist 
projects remain profoundly fearful of 
trans ition ing to the univer sal, resist ing big- 
picture spec u lat ive polit ics by condemning 
them as neces sar ily oppress ive’ (ibid.). Such 
a posi tion clearly reson ates with the work 
of the Marxist soci olo gist Vivek Chibber, 
who argues that issues of scale and the 
‘univer sal iz ing drive of capital’ gener ate a 
partic u larly prob lem atic schism at the 
heart of contem por ary post co lo nial theory 
(2013: 285). Although it ‘presents itself as 
the analyt ical frame work of capit al ist 
domin a tion’, he argues, ‘it rejects the idea of 
a univer sal theory. Hence, it is in the 
awkward posi tion of the acknow ledg ment 
that capit al ism has been glob al ized, but 
denying that we can conceive a general 
theory of its func tion ing or its prop er ties’ 
(2015: n.p.). 
 For Chibber and Laboria Cuboniks, 
rejec tion of the project of construct ing a 
univer sal has contrib uted to a perceived 
diminu tion of polit ical agency and ambi-
tion. Many contem por ary eman cip at ory 
projects do not appear ‘propor tion ate to 
the monstrous complex ity of . . . a reality 
crosshatched with ﬁ bre- optic cables, radio 
and microwaves, oil and gas pipelines, 
aerial and ship ping routes, and the unre-
lent ing, simul tan eous execu tion of millions 
of commu nic a tion proto cols with every 
passing milli second’ ( Laboria Cuboniks 
2015 ). In short, we do not have ready to 
hand the requis ite concep tual resources 
for confront ing capit al ism, ecolo gical crisis 
or complex, embed ded struc tures of oppres-
sion. Th e wilful or unwit ting neglect of 
actions beyond the scale of the local and 
the micro pol it ical leads to the treat ment of 
univer sals as abso lutes, and gener ates ‘a 
debil it at ing disjunc ture between the thing 
we seek to depose and the strategies we 
advance to depose it’ (ibid.). If we are 
going to take the risk of advan cing large- 
scale, counter- hege monic gender- polit ical 
projects, xenofem in ism insists, it is imper-
at ive that we inter cede within debates 
about the oper a tion and consti tu tion of 
the univer sal. 
 Th e univer sal, then, is a mutable object 
of polit ical contest a tion, posi tioned at the