PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
URBANIBALISM

ecology (see the ‘three ecolo gies’ by 
 Guattari 1989 ). 
 As artistic engage ment, dissen sual 
cooking and polit ics of exper i ment a tion, 
Urbanibalism is not only commit ted to 
mapping  Umwelten but to connect ing 
them in new constel la tions that are called 
 Convivia , from the Latin word for ‘feasts’ 
that means liter ally ‘living together’ ( con + 
 vivere ). Convivia are the ﬁ nal gath er ing of 
the  Umwelten  that have been discovered, 
explored and cooked. A communal feast 
with an always diﬀ er ent community of 
urban gast ro nomers that unveils the 
common dimen sion of any urban land-
scape and meta bol ism. 
 Posthuman Ecology 
 ‘Innervated by ﬂ ows of energy and matter 
/ the urban land scape is alive . . . build ings 
are liquid strata of miner als – just very 
slow’ (Stanza 2). Urbanibalism considers 
the city and the  nature cul ture complex as a 
tangle of ﬂ ows and strata ‘where the border 
between organic and inor ganic life blurs’ 
(Stanza 3). Th e world is seen as a  geolo gical 
meta bol ism where strata of diﬀ er ent 
natures overlap: inor ganic, organic, social, 
economic, linguistic, iconic . . . Philosopher 
Manuel DeLanda has given a good example 
of this in his descrip tion of archi tec ture as 
an exoskel eton of the human: 
 Th e human endo skel eton was one of the 
many products of that ancient miner al iz-
a tion. Yet that is not the only geolo gical 
inﬁ lt ra tion that the human species has 
under gone. About eight thou sand years 
ago, human popu la tions began miner al iz-
ing again when they developed an urban 
 exoskel eton : bricks of sun- dried clay 
became the build ing mater i als for their 
homes, which in turn surroun ded and 
were surroun ded by stone monu ments 
and defens ive walls. Th is exoskel eton 
served a purpose similar to its internal 
approach is not completely new and 
belongs to the history and anthro po logy of 
food and to so- called Material Culture 
Studies (see, for instance, the vision ary 
work 
of 
the 
Italian 
scholar 
Piero 
Camporesi). Central to this meth od o logy is 
the idea that gast ro nomy is a not a neutral 
and relaxed hobby but a cultural ﬁ eld which 
carries with it ‘the smell of the centur ies’ 
(Stanza 10), that is the redol ent traces of 
millen ary wars, colo nial inva sions and 
mass migra tions. Both art and gast ro nomy 
incarn ate a radical antag on ism against the 
fate of nature and history. ‘Culinary art 
arose from the invent ive ness of the poor 
against a matri cidal nature – and never 
from pauper ism’ (Stanza 10). Along this 
tradi tion, Urbanibalism can be deﬁ ned as 
‘materic art’ or ‘the art of living matter’. 
Th ese aesthet ics take issue with deﬁ n i tions 
such as food design, molecu lar cuisine or 
bioart where a larger and adequately 
scientiﬁ c notion of meta bol ism is missing 
or is only under stood in the isol ated sphere 
of a labor at ory setting. 
 Th e stomach is indeed an organ of 
thought(!). Urbanibalism readily alludes 
to the etymo logy of  Homo sapiens, that 
(contrary to ration al ist expect a tions) in 
the original Latin means ‘the human that 
has a good sense of taste’ (Stanza 8). In old 
Latin ‘to know’ ( sapere ) means ‘to have 
taste’. Th e meth od o logy of Urbanibalism 
moves from the subject ive exper i ence of 
the world to the meta bolic perspect ive of 
speciﬁ c forms of life: this could be a simple 
organ ism like a partic u lar yeast strain 
ﬂ our ish ing in the air of Brussels, a histor-
ical record as a war recipe book, a polit ical 
moment like the siege of Paris, the mineral 
compos i tion of Berlin tap water, an old 
Dutch still life of edible ﬂ owers, etc. Each 
form of life produces and absorbs its own 
 Umwelt of rela tions – a meta bolic and 
aesthetic 
ecology 
that 
Urbanibalism 
explores beyond the borders of tradi tional