PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN LITERATURE AND CRITICISM

Th e idea of memory as creation under-
stands liter at ure as an agent of conceiv ing 
new concep tual personae deﬁ ned by their 
rela tion al ity and outward- bound inter con-
nec tions, in partic u lar with non- human 
others, 
includ ing 
the 
species- other 
( McHugh 2011 ), nature ( Mentz 2015b ), 
and land scape ( Allewaert 2013 ). Given the 
partic u lar ity of our loca tion and know-
ledge produc tion, our under stand ing of 
liter at ure is always partial and limited. 
Universalism and liberal indi vidu al ism 
promoted by a canon ical, human ist tradi-
tion of liter ary arts there fore do not stand. 
As the subject is now under stood in terms 
of its rela tion with multiple others, it 
involves uplift  ing the once stable and com-
pla cent subject from the famil iar in a pro-
cess of dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion. Dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
refers to an active distan cing from famil iar, 
conven tional ways of think ing and repres-
ent a tion. It also calls for a revi sion of 
norm at ive values, such as sexual and racial 
diﬀ er ences stip u lated and enforced by 
domin ant insti tu tions. Dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
can be a painful process of fear, insec ur ity 
and nostal gia as it involves the ridding of 
cher ished habits of thought and repres ent-
a tion. But it can be product ive in the spirit 
of endur ance and creation in aﬃ  rm at ive 
ethics. 
 In the tradi tion of Barthes’ post struc-
tur al ist thought, the task of criti cism is to 
go beyond ﬂ at repe ti tion and slavish ﬁ del-
ity to the text in the search for its ‘Truth’ 
( Barthes 1975 ). Rather, criti cism should 
enact processes of subject form a tion 
through strategies of dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
and defa mil i ar iz a tion. Th is diﬀ ers from 
criti cism of power loca tions in the tradi-
tion of negat ive dialectics. Critique and 
creativ ity becomes praxis that actu al izes 
the form a tion and real iz a tion of altern at-
ive, aﬃ  rm at ive ﬁ gur a tions that counter 
domin ant, major it arian repres ent a tions of 
the subject. 
 POSTHUMAN LITERATURE AND