PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
VIOLENCE

person hood, as a means of protec tions 
against viol ence and viol a tions, that has 
since the 1990s been explored under the 
banner of ‘non- human rights’, ‘the rights of 
nature’ or ‘Earth juris pru dence’ ( Tavares 
2014b ;  Demos 2015 ). Such a legal innov a-
tion (already prac tised to some degree in 
Bolivia and Ecuador) 5 entails a legal, polit-
ical, social, cultural and philo soph ical 
upheaval of extreme dimen sions, one that 
embraces radic ally altern at ive cosmo lo gies 
and perspect ives regard ing nature and 
culture (world views that have tradi tion ally 
borne the brunt of colo nial epistemic and 
mater ial viol ences) as well as the very 
premises through which we conceive of 
viol ence itself ( Viveiros de Castro 2015 ; 
 Franke 2010 ). 
 Such a project on the one hand takes us 
back to slow viol ence, as this relates to 
Indigenous struggles for human rights, and 
envir on mental justice in the global South. 
But it also opens up into more univer sal 
ques tions such as what Patrick Hanaﬁ n 
calls a ‘micro pol it ics of posthu man rights’, 
enabled by the think ing of Rosi Braidotti, 
that aims ‘to subvert the major it arian 
model of human rights as one premised 
upon the human as white neolib eral male’ 
( Hanaﬁ n 2014 : 214). In this concep tion of 
posthu man rights that ‘embody the claims 
of trans versal assem blages of indi vidu als 
who do not see a binary cut between 
thought and action, life and death, envir on-
ment and human ity, or anim al ity and 
human ity’, and who do not cede to the 
demands to divest oneself of one’s singu-
lar ity and become ‘human’ (ibid.: 215, 218), 
the chal lenge is to ﬁ nd strategies for 
aesthet i ciz ing and narrat ing slow viol ence 
that would entail moving beyond simply 
 human iz ing inac cess ible viol ences. 6   
 See also Naturescultures; Necropolitics; 
Neocolonial; Non- human Agency; Post-
human Rights; Technicity; War. 
gies) are registered not only as the ﬁ elds 
 through which  viol ence is enacted and medi-
ated, but also as the poten tially active 
 sensoria or  indic at ors that might bear witness 
to the (violent) crime – as soon as one learns 
how to access and read the traces ( Forensic 
Architecture 2014 ; see espe cially the chapters 
by Anselm Franke and Eyal Weizman). 
 But the non- human is not only an evid en-
tial ﬁ gure, assist ant to human demands for 
justice; neither is the envir on ment merely a 
passive victim of viol ence. Rather, war 
is waged against nature as if it were a crim inal 
 subject . Th is war is no longer fought merely 
in the name of progress, proﬁ t and secur ity 
(i.e. modern ity, colo ni al ism, capit al ism), 
but also as part of the global ‘war on terror’ 
that has ever- intens i ﬁ ed since the events of 
9/11 (burned into the  USA ’s psyche as  the 
deﬁ n it ive image of viol ence), 4 bring ing us 
back at least tangen tially – albeit in a 
distinct speed and register – to the media 
spec tacles of viol ence with which we began. 
In this context, as demon strated by Hannah 
Meszaros Martin’s research into the crim in-
al iz a tion of the coca plant in Colombia, the 
violent erad ic a tion of non- human life (for 
instance, through aerial fumig a tion) neces-
sar ily implies the erad ic a tion of the lives of 
the humans that inhabit a given envir on-
ment, as well as their ‘life worlds’. Such viol-
ence is legally sanc tioned in the name of 
ﬁ ght ing the ‘war on drugs’, as this inter-
twines with the global ‘war on terror’ – with 
both ‘wars’ serving as the smokescreen 
behind which states, legally or illeg ally, 
exert viol ence upon their human and 
nonhu man popu la tions ( Meszaros Martin 
2015 ). Th is theatre of oper a tions in which 
non- human life, here the object of ‘ecocide’ 
( Meszaros Martin 2015 ;  Tavares 2014a : 229; 
and  Zierler 2011 , cited in  Lahoud and 
Tavares 2013 ), is deemed ‘terror istic’ and in 
need of violent exterm in a tion, is but one of 
the contexts that intens i ﬁ es the need for a 
whole sale rethink ing of legal stand ing and