PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PLANETARY

Responding to the crisis of anthro po-
centric criti cism, Gayatri Spivak in Death 
of a Discipline raised the ques tion of what 
it would mean to ‘imagine ourselves as 
plan et ary subjects rather than global 
agents’ (2003). For Spivak, the crit ical 
poten tial of plan et ar ity lies primar ily in 
oﬀ er ing a mode of iden ti ﬁ c a tion that does 
not deﬁ ne itself in oppos i tion to the Other, 
and only obliquely in the ecolo gical sense 
of being ‘custodi ans of our very own 
planet’. As a stra tegic choice of termin o-
logy, the notion of the plan et ary allows us 
to sidestep the impasse between advoc ates 
of a cosmo pol itan iden tity as an altern at ive 
to ethni city and nation- based forms of 
collect ive belong ing, and those in favour 
of retool ing national iden tity as a mode of 
resist ance to the economic imper i al ism 
of glob al iz a tion. From the point of view of 
the current sense of urgency regard ing the 
need for a collect ive response to ecolo gical 
crisis, however, Spivak’s original ques tion 
could be refor mu lated more assert ively to 
ask what it would mean to see ourselves as 
‘plan et ary agents’, acting on behalf and in 
the name of the planet, rather than as 
‘global subjects’, pass ively accept ing the 
rules of the game of glob al iz a tion. 
 While the global features both as a 
time less abstrac tion and as a delim iter of a 
discrete period of human history, whose 
begin nings are traced back either several 
decades to the commu nic a tions revolu tion 
or centur ies to the medi eval roots of world 
trade, the plan et ary inhab its a more exten-
ded tempor al ity that both exceeds the 
human and has its own speciﬁ c histor icity. 
It impli citly acknow ledges the fact that 
during the ‘deep time’ reach ing back 
millions of years before the advent of 
human ity, the Earth had its own history 
that was as event ful and unpre dict able as 
human history. Attention to the deep 
history of the Earth contex tu al izes the 
activ it ies of our species, remind ing us of 
corporations to escape social regulation, 
take advantage of cheap labour and 
negotiate major tax breaks. It also created a 
political constituency that has successfully 
blocked measures to come up with an 
eﬀ ective international response to global 
warming. Th e rationale of globalization, 
which views the Earth as a resource to be 
competitively exploited for maximum 
proﬁ t, can be contrasted with the planetary 
ideals expressed in Bolivia’s 2010 Law of 
Mother Earth, which granted nature equal 
rights to humans and deﬁ ned the Earth as 
‘a unique, indivisible, self- regulating com-
mu nity of interrelated beings’. 
 Tension between the ethos of the plan-
et ary and the glob al ized mindset can also 
be felt in theor et ical spheres. Writing 
on the accel er at ing ‘plan et ary crisis of 
climate change’ in 2009, histor ian Dipesh 
Chakrabarty made the signi ﬁ c ant admis-
sion that two decades of study ing ‘theor ies 
of glob al iz a tion, Marxist analysis of capital, 
subal tern studies, and post co lo nial criti-
cism’ had not prepared him for the ‘plan et-
ary conjunc ture within which human ity 
ﬁ nds itself today’. In a world trans ﬁ gured 
by ecolo gical crisis, on the brink of mass 
extinc tion and facing irre vers ible changes 
to oceans and atmo sphere, crit ical theory 
is also in the midst of a paradigm shift . Th e 
general neglect within histor ical crit ical 
theory of envir on mental issues, symbol-
ized by Michel Foucault’s infam ous expres-
sion of his ‘detest a tion of nature’ by liter ally 
turning his back on the land scape, was 
based on the rejec tion of attempts to see 
the world as an ecolo gical total ity as irre-
triev ably essen tial ist and denial of the 
exist ence of nature as anything other than 
a self- refer en tial linguistic category. By 
contrast, signs of an incip i ent plan et ary 
turn can be recog nized in mater i al ist posi-
tions of Speculative Realism and object- 
oriented onto logy, as well as in the wider 
theor iz a tion of the posthu man.