PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NOISE

Abductive infer ence and heur ist ics oﬀ er 
‘fast and frugal’ solu tions for the navig a-
tion of noisy envir on ments ( Bechtel and 
Richardson 2010 ). Th e extreme eﬀ ect ive-
ness of the non- mono tonic char ac ter of 
abduc tion in cognit ive systems is based 
on the long evol u tion ary devel op ment of 
intel li gence, and its error- toler ance or resi-
li ence to noise is not as yet replic able by 
algorithmic proced ures or arti ﬁ  cial intel li-
gence ( Magnani 2009 ). 
 Noise is gener ally deemed an imped i-
ment to success ful inter pret a tion of data, 
and attempts are made to reduce or cancel 
it. However, it is just as oft en sought out as 
signi ﬁ c ant in its own right. Th is is partic u-
larly evident in science, where the pres ence 
of noise may be an import ant indic a tion of 
the theor et ical incon sist en cies and prac-
tical deﬁ  cien cies of the invest ig a tion or 
proced ure. Th ere is a wide range of 
examples where noise is purpose fully 
incor por ated into the system as a bene ﬁ -
cial eﬀ ect or as a func tional aspect of its 
oper a tion. For example, sens it iv ity to 
signal detec tion can be increased by the 
addi tion of a certain quant ity of noise. 
 Both 
conscious 
and 
uncon scious 
processes are much better equipped for 
noti cing devi ations from the regu lar ity of 
patterns than they are for plot ting all its 
details. If patterns are regu lar it ies that the 
organ ism is habitu ated to, then it is to 
 perturb a tions  of this regu lar ity that its 
atten tion is direc ted, and that its uncon-
scious neuro- compu ta tional mech an isms 
are primed for anomaly detec tion ( Bouwer 
and Honing 2012 ). Th e pattern- governed 
organ ism is primed to react to noise. Th is 
is evident in tests on audit ory pattern 
resol u tion in f MRI scans, showing neur-
onal 
activ a tion 
poten tial 
spikes, 
or 
‘mismatch negat iv ity’ responses, to highly 
complex patterns ( Näätänena 1990 ). 
 Whether a highly compressed descrip-
tion with a high noise ratio is better than a 
less compact descrip tion that is more error 
toler ant is relat ive to the prag matic situ-
ation, and this depends on the speed at 
which pattern recog ni tion is required, the 
risks asso ci ated with failure, and to cognit-
ive resource alloc a tion prob lems in general. 
In eﬀ ect, the sensory exper i ence of biolo-
gical organ isms is a highly evolved mech-
an ism for pattern recog ni tion whose lossy 
compres sion rate allows for a signi ﬁ c ant 
quant ity of noise. Th e payoﬀ  is a reduc tion 
in cognit ive processing cost allow ing for 
rapid response times. 
 Th e concept of noise is related to the 
caus a tion- correl a tion problem in stat ist-
ical prob ab il ity. Variables that are correl-
ated appear as a signal of their causal 
connec tion. When a causal connec tion is 
inferred but the correl a tion is merely 
contin gent then the infer ence is a false 
posit ive: what was taken for signal was, in 
fact, noise. Conversely, correl ated vari ables 
may be taken to be only contin gently 
related and ignored as noise. In such a case, 
if in fact there is a causal connec tion then 
what was under stood as noise was actu ally 
signal; a false negat ive. 
 Th e discrim in a tion between signal and 
noise can be modelled accord ing to the 
Bayesian calib ra tion of a decision criterion 
on a prob ab il ity distri bu tion, known in 
signal detec tion theory as the ‘receiver 
oper at ing char ac ter istic’ ( Proust 2013 ). 
Th e discov ery of patterns in random audit-
ory or visual noise is a phenomenon called 
pareido lia, which is part of a wider class of 
prob ab il ity estim a tion falla cies called 
apophenia (includ ing the gambler’s fallacy, 
over ﬁ t ting of stat ist ics, etc.). 
 Some theor ists have applied the 
concep tion of noise to the analysis of 
complex adapt ive systems such as evol u-
tion ary ecolo gies and ﬁ nan cial markets. 
However, it can be argued that random-
ness is such an intrinsic part of the func-
tional organ iz a tion of such systems that it