PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STATIC GLOW

example, may change with web fashion re- 
design trends. Christine’s MySpace proﬁ le 
lives on, ten years aft er she was killed by a 
drunk driver.  3 In the years follow ing her 
death, the site was peri od ic ally active with 
mourn ing comments, and gener ally used 
as a memorial by her parents (see Figure 1). 
Ten years later, MySpace has completely 
redesigned its inter face, and consequently 
the face of Christine’s online posthum ous 
pres ence (see Figure  2). Th e result is an 
uncanny pres ence, patches of fossil ized 
content with a slick new inter face bearing 
the recog niz able default settings. Christine’s 
static glow is ten years strong at the time 
of writing.  
 Static Glow as Commodity 
 For commer cial providers an aban doned 
proﬁ le is at best an inact ive proﬁ le; however, 
when the amount of inact ive proﬁ les aﬀ ect 
the possib il ity to sell space for targeted 
advert ising, plat form providers will attempt 
to close inact ive accounts. At worst, a 
deceased person’s proﬁ le becomes a liab il-
ity when the plat form provider uses the 
user- gener ated content for advert ising 
campaigns and risks becom ing exposed by 
using images of a deceased person, or when 
the proﬁ le is vandal ized by users who are 
aware of the death of the person. Reason 
enough to start regu lat ing the digital estate. 
 As our lives started to play out online, 
plat forms became a growing archive for 
our life events. From teenage party ing over 
our ﬁ rst love to the birth of our chil dren, 
and the passing of our parents and friends, 
these docu ments became archives of 
highly personal value. Th is value is being 
monet ized 
by 
compan ies 
provid ing 
services to preserve our online life, luring 
us with a notion of an immor tal memento 
and prom ising to posthum ously let us 
keep our place in the social graph of our 
life. Pioneer vendors such as  LIVESON , 
Eternime and  ETER 9 paved the way for 
continu ous pres ence through virtual 
immor tal ity. 
 If static glow is an indic a tion of popular-
ity, the highest form of eman a tion could be 
the posthum ous holo gram, such as those 
developed by Hologram  US for Patsy Cline, 
Liberace, and Whitney Houston (see 
 Kleinman 2015 ). Occasionally, these are 
developed ‘prehum ously’ for such person al-
it ies as rapper Chief Keef and WikiLeaks 
founder Julian Assange as a means to 
circum vent territ ori ally bound laws. 4 Rosi 
Braidotti has expan ded Mbembe’s ( 2003 ) 
deﬁ n i tion of necro pol it ics to an ‘oppor-
tun istic exploit a tion of the life of you’ 
( Braidotti 2013 : 123). Th is exploit a tion now 
contin ues aft er death, as posthum ous data 
is also subject to commodi ﬁ c a tion. From 
the Holy Grail to Tupac Shakur’s paten ted 
holo gram onstage appear ance, immor tal ity 
is a hot commod ity. 
 With social network ing sites projec ted 
to include more dead users than live ones 
in the not too distant future, 5 could 
humans be anom alies in a web of ghosts? 
In addi tion to these increas ing posthum-
ous agents, most proﬁ le or account activ ity 
seems to follow the infam ous 80/20 rule, or 
the Pareto Principle. Th at is to say, around 
80 per cent of proﬁ les or accounts on the 
 WWW are inact ive. Th ese may be owned 
by dead people, though usually they are 
created by people who have set up an 
account once and never returned, or  bots . 
For example, what surfaced through the 
Ashley Madison data leak (an online 
dating service for married people), 6 is how 
many of the online ‘engagers’ were actu ally 
bots, programmed to engage with hetero-
sexual men ( Newitz 2015 ). 7 
 Not only do our traces live on aft er we 
die in data bases asso ci ated with our 
proﬁ les and desisted accounts, but more 
and more data is being created and capit al-
ized upon from inter ac tions with bots, bots