PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PLACENTA POLITICS

genetic elements, includ ing the multiple 
hormon ally 
loaded, 
contra cept ive- pill 
driven, tech no lo gic ally medi ated exten ded 
mother- machines ( Roberts 2016 ). Th e 
toxic phar ma co lo gical aspects of contem-
por ary repro duc tion ( Preciado 2013 ) 
expose the gender system as a machinery 
that is currently multi plied, pulped, upheld, 
hacked, re- construc ted and abol ished on a 
daily basis. Both gene- editing and gender- 
editing have become part of our vocab u-
lary and our social as well as tech no lo gical 
prac tices. 
 It follows that we need more studies of 
placenta polit ics and the immun o lo gical 
paradigm within the femin ist frame work 
of bodily neo- mater i al ist posthu man 
thought. By exten sion, it is also import ant 
to re- frame the mater nal body. Where 
placenta polit ics oﬀ ers a new line of 
thought for bio- polit ics and thereby a new 
possib il ity for crit ical reﬂ ec tion on both 
rela tional ethics and repro duct ive labour, 
the category of the preg nant posthu man 
(see Pregnant Posthuman) posits the 
mater nal body as a subject, which supplies 
us with a ﬁ gure as a start ing point for 
critique, for re- think ing itself, and for 
devel op ing and defend ing a diﬀ er ent, 
sexuate ethics. 
 Cyberfeminism 
and 
Xenofeminism 
argue that the mater nal body – tech nic ally 
female (see Xenofeminsim) – is not one. 
Th e myriad of tech no lo gic ally medi ated 
prac tices and socially diﬀ er en ti ated modes 
of moth er ing, ranging from surrog acy to 
the recently approved three- parent family, 
are the result of the pervas ive impact of the 
appar atus of repro duct ive tech no lo gies and 
socio- economic prac tices. Th e explo sion of 
the alleged linear ity of the repro duct ive 
process also intro duces new actors, from 
external donors to internal gene- editing 
prac tices, all of them reliant on tech no lo-
gical medi ation. Placenta polit ics respects 
this complex ity while fore ground ing the 
insert ing complex ity at the heart of philo-
soph ical thought. In this context, the 
maternal-placental-fetal assemblage can 
be under stood as a ﬁ gur a tion of aﬃ  rm at-
ive rela tion al ity and multiple becom ings. 
Th e placenta func tions as an inter face of 
multiple particles and compon ents that 
jointly sustain the dynamic process of 
forming new organ isms. Th is living 
process enacts a complex dynam ics and 
expresses an aﬃ  rm at ive vision of life as a 
cooper at ive eﬀ ort. Placenta polit ics so 
deﬁ ned expresses the vital force of the 
multiple agents and forces that co- exist 
through trans form at ive encoun ters. Th us 
it is not only the case that the bio- polit ical 
and the thanato- polit ical rela tions exist in 
a continuum – in keeping with Foucault’s 
original insight – but also that they are 
consti tuted by hetero gen eous assemblages 
of diverse compon ents. Placenta polit ics 
can be fully situ ated within the contem-
por ary posthu man land scape. 
 Th is has a number of implic a tions also 
for contem por ary posthu man femin ist 
polit ics ( Braidotti 2016a ). Firstly, knowing 
that contem por ary nomadic or ‘dividual’ 
posthu man 
subjects 
are 
consti tuted 
through processes of mutual speciﬁ c a tion 
and diﬀ er en tial modu la tion, we can deﬁ ne 
sexual diﬀ er ence as one of the motors of 
multiple diﬀ er ing within a common 
matter. Th e binary gender system is just 
a mech an ism to capture this sexed multi-
pli city, which aims at redu cing and dis -
cip lin ing the inﬁ n ite modu la tions and 
the ‘thou sand little sexes’ ( Deleuze and 
Guattari 1988 : 277), which consti tute our 
virtual embod ied and embed ded, aﬀ ect ive 
and rela tional struc ture. 
 Secondly, we need to consider the high 
level of tech no lo gical medi ation – both 
bio- genetic and inform a tional – that 
surrounds sexu al ity and repro duc tion 
today. Contemporary bodies are shaped by 
a complex inter ac tion of social and bio-