PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
QUANTUM ANTHROPOLOGY

words, if we are present when someone is 
speak ing we feel we have under stood that 
person’s meaning, whereas we concede a 
level of ambi gu ity to the written word. 
However, Derrida argues that speech is 
always/already writing (1976) because 
speech is as complex, as contex tu ally alive 
and open to inter pret a tion as writing. 
 Derrida’s inter ven tion is commonly 
inter preted as one that denat ur al izes 
speech by describ ing it in terms of cultural 
complex ity, a manoeuvre that sustains the 
binary with a category correc tion. However, 
build ing on Derrida’s insist ence that 
decon struc tion does more than reverse a 
binary, I displace the oppos i tion and its 
polit ical agendas by arguing that writing 
was 
always/already 
nature 
(complex, 
system ic ally involved, entangled). In other 
words, by natur al iz ing writing, ‘no outside- 
text’ becomes ‘no outside nature’, and thus 
origin ary complex ity becomes our depar-
ture point in a revised post- human it ies. 
 If decon struc tion is not a meth od o logy 
whose only purpose is to muddle concep-
tual integ rity and to under line the human 
condi tion’s solipsism (culture), then we are 
invited to consider a meta- physis whose 
internal torsions have quantum implic a-
tions. As particle phys i cist, femin ist and 
philo sopher of science, Karen Barad 
explains it: ‘Concepts do not refer to the 
object of invest ig a tion. Rather, concepts 
in their mater ial intra- activ ity enact the 
diﬀ er en ti ated insepar ab il ity that  is a 
phenomenon’ (2010: 3). Th is way of think-
ing recon ﬁ g ures the diﬀ er ence between 
ideation and mater i al ity, culture and 
nature, and in such a way that nature, or 
reality, becomes artic u late, agen tial, and 
even cogniz ing, albeit in involved and 
oft en unanti cip ated ways. Indeed, in what 
might be described as a posthu man 
perform ativ ity, 
where 
the 
diﬀ er ence 
between subjects and objects are ‘intra- 
actively’ ( Barad 2007 : 168–72) blurred, the 
conven tional co- ordin ates of refer ence and 
loca tion are profoundly disor i ented and 
diﬀ rac ted. 
 Th e reson ance between aspects of crit-
ical theory, post- struc tur al ism and decon-
struc tion in partic u lar, are envi sioned as 
expres sions of Life’s literacies in  Quantum 
Anthropologies . Importantly, this displace-
ment of ‘who’ reads and ‘who’ authors 
discov ers a more compre hens ive sense of 
social ity 
whose 
intric a tion 
(writ ing) 
discover modes of being (onto logy) with/in 
modes 
of 
knowing 
(epistem o logy). 
According to this view, ‘textu al ity’ is a 
systemic enfold ing, always contem por ary 
and product ively alive because never closed 
oﬀ  in a past that is behind us. Consequently, 
‘texts’ are poly morph ous, such that even 
seem ingly primeval organ isms, indeed,  all 
organ isms, as well as appar ently inan im ate 
and life less entit ies such as a photon, or the 
beha viour of light ning, become subjects of 
cognit ive and agen tial entan gle ment and 
obser va tional inten tion. Quantum anthro-
po logy explores this sense of a liter ate 
‘world ing’, diﬀ ract ing the author/reader 
and recon ﬁ g ur ing the diﬀ er ence between 
subject and object, human and non- human, 
even life and non- life, in the process. 
 See also Diﬀ raction; Feminist Post-
humanities; 
Neo/New 
Materialism; 
Posthumanist Performativity. 
 Vicki Kirby