PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SOCIALLY JUST PEDAGOGIES

it is an assemblage; a complex ity of 
networks of human and non- human actors 
which give rise to creat ive learn ing rather 
than 
human 
inten tion al ity. 
Braidotti 
( 2013 ) also alerts us to the prob lem atic 
nature of Cartesian dual isms, such as 
mind/body, nature/culture, human/non- 
human, 
matter/meaning, 
teach ing/
research, theory/prac tice, think ing/doing. 
From a posthu man socially just perspect-
ive, pedago gies would assume a holistic 
and vital perspect ive, which includes both 
parts of these dual isms. 
 Barad ( 2007 ,  2015 ) refers to a ‘yearn ing 
for connec tion, prolonged longing and the 
spark ing of new imagin ar ies’ (2015: 388). 
Although she is refer ring to light ning here, 
these desires for connectiv ity and creat ive 
imagin ar ies are partic u larly apt for socially 
just pedago gies too. Continuing in this 
vein, Barad contin ues ‘Lightning is a lively 
play of in/determ in acy, troub ling matters 
of self and other, past and future, life and 
death. It elec tri ﬁ es our imagin a tions and 
our bodies’ (ibid.). Th is troub ling of self 
and other is a decol on iz ing logic, where 
diﬀ er ence is not seen as essen tial ized, 
foreign, negat ive, separ ate, other, lack, less 
than but rather as aﬃ  rm at ive, entangled, 
inde term in ate, as diﬀ er ence within, and as 
multi pli cit ies. As Barad puts it, ‘Th e self is 
itself a multi pli city, a super pos i tion of 
beings, becom ings, here and there’s, now 
and then’s’ (2014: 176). Haraway’s use of 
Trinh Minh- ha’s ( 1986/7 ;  1989 ) inap pro-
pri ate/d other which means to be ‘in 
crit ical, decon struct ing rela tion al ity, in a 
diﬀ ract ing rather than reﬂ ect ing (ratio)
nality – as a means of making potent 
connec tion that exceeds domin a tion’ 
(2004a: 69) is partic u larly apt for socially 
just pedago gies. Th e inap pro pri ate/d other 
provokes a rethink ing of diﬀ er ence and 
rela tion al ity – as diﬀ er ence within, as well 
as diﬀ er ences among humans and non- or 
other- than-humans. Posthuman socially 
just pedago gies are distinct ive for their 
celeb ra tion of diﬀ er ence as product ive 
rather than seeing it as alter ity. Th e inap-
pro pri ate/d other is an emblem atic ﬁ gure 
for this aﬃ  rm at ive stance where diﬀ er ence 
is seen as a tool of creativ ity rather than as 
an apartheid separ a tion. 
 Haraway’s notions of situ ated know-
ledges (partic u lar and embod ied perspect-
ives of the knower), her compan ion species 
and signi ﬁ c ant others, her notions of ﬂ our-
ish ing and nature cul ture (1991, 2008) have 
partic u lar relev ance for posthu man socially 
just pedago gies which fore ground trans dis-
cip lin ar ity and the import ance of includ ing 
the natural sciences and human it ies, as well 
as more than human others in educa tional 
projects. 
Both 
Braidotti 
( 2013 ) 
and 
Haraway ( 2014 ) emphas ize the import ance 
of prac tices of joy for socially just pedago-
gies which they see as essen tial for living 
in our current times, where possib il it ies 
of ﬂ our ish ing in the Anthropocene have 
become increas ingly comprom ised. Desire 
is also seen not as lack or need but as 
product ive start ing point in the educa tion 
process. 
 A posthu man ist perspect ive allows us 
to think about the eﬀ ects of colo ni al ism on 
pedago gies – a project which has become 
increas ingly urgent in south ern contexts, 
but which is of import ance to north ern 
contexts as well ( Mbembe 2001 ;  Taylor and 
Pacini-Ketchabaw 2015 ). A posthu man 
socially just pedagogy facil it ates a playful 
exper i ment a tion and an aﬃ  rm at ive ethics 
of poten ti al ity, thus provid ing an imagin at-
ive and creat ive way of dealing with 
inequal it ies and forms of colon iz a tion in 
higher educa tion. Posthuman socially just 
pedago gies enable us ‘to devise new, prac-
tical and ethical acts of engage ment which 
motiv ate and enact change in the mater ial 
continuum that consti tutes educa tional 
prac tice’ ( Taylor and Ivinson 2013 : 667). 
Th e 
concern 
with 
respons ib il ity,