PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NOMADIC SENSIBILITY

crisis toward the idea of Roma life as valu-
able rather than objec tion able (includ ing 
 Baker and Hlavajova 2013 ). Th is shift  in 
percep tion is long overdue, but the 
conscious attempts by Roma cultural 
actors and support ers 2 to present new 
narrat ives about our community are 
perhaps the begin ning of a re- eval u ation. 
New repres ent a tions of Roma culture 
through artistic prac tice are not only chal-
len ging percep tions of Roma but also ideas 
about the way we all live today. By aiming 
to be  social  rather than socially engaged – 
arising as it does from the mater ial neces-
sit ies of survival founded in the cultural 
urgen cies of the Roma social group – the 
nomadic sens ib il ity recog nizes equal ity 
across the prac tices of life and art; a 
human istic gesture that posi tions us all as 
artists – and equally none of us. 
 A history of nomadism and the collect-
ive exper i ence of life at the edge of state 
control has resul ted in the devel op ment of 
Roma’s innate under stand ing of the value 
of the make shift  and its asso ci ated qual it ies 
of move ment, trans ition, simul tan eity and 
adapt ab il ity; qual it ies that have performed 
an import ant role the devel op ment of the 
Roma aesthetic to produce a set of values 
that are routinely played out through visual 
and sensory markers. Th e reas on ing behind 
Roma’s emphasis on aesthetic modes of 
accul tur a tion becomes clearer when we 
consider the historic absence of a liter ary 
tradi tion within Roma culture; a factor 
which in itself has required the devel op-
ment of a complex visual vocab u lary. 
 Th e prag mat ism inher ent within the 
nomadic sens ib il ity stems from an adapt ab-
il ity and resi li ence learned through shared 
histor ies of move ment and cultural narrat-
ives shaped by life on the outskirts of society. 
Th ese qual it ies have histor ic ally equipped 
Roma with the facil ity to resist the oft en 
inhuman treat ment they received: economic 
and legis lat ive pres sure towards assim il a-
tion and expul sion – although not without 
hard ship and serious instances of oppres-
sion. Th at same pres sure to conform contin-
ues to be with stood through acts of living 
that operate across social, cultural and 
aesthetic bound ar ies to enact and symbol ize 
the creat ive possib il it ies of mobil ity and 
diversity. By product ively chal len ging such 
bound ar ies – precisely by consti tut ing 
them selves across them – Roma recog nize 
the danger of exclu sion at the cost of mean-
ing ful connec tion. Yet that same will ing ness 
to inter rupt estab lished conven tion, whether 
territ orial or aesthetic, that reﬂ ects the 
human istic prin ciple of unity of time and 
space and turn it into a crucial build ing 
block for citizen ship, contrib utes toward 
Roma being cast as a threat to society – a 
deep- seated suspi cion of Roma that contin-
ues to fuel anti-Roma feeling today. 
 Th e nomadic sens ib il ity has by neces-
sity encour aged the integ ra tion of Roma 
artistic prac tice within the social realm. 
Th is co- depend ence of the social and the 
artistic is impli cit within  Roma visu al ity – 
or the collect ive qual it ies embed ded in 
objects and arte facts that origin ate from, 
or circu late within Roma communit ies. 
Th ese include objects made by and/or 
admired by Roma such as tools, textiles, 
décor and other ephem era of every day life. 
Th e shared qual it ies found within these 
objects could also be described as a Roma 
‘style’ which, when exten ded beyond the 
realm of the visual to include wider 
sensory percep tion, forms the found a tions 
of a Roma aesthetic – a visual sens ib il ity 
developed in part as a response to the 
prag matic demands and consequent values 
of Roma life and the prin ciples and urgen-
cies of Roma exper i ence. 
 A pervas ive ambi gu ity is evident 
through out Roma aesthet ics and Roma 
social rela tions. Roma have long existed