PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
RADICAL MEDIOCRITY

person is a node in a network, knotted into 
a web. Being a subject is the result of 
continu ous folding in and extend ing feed-
back loops. Th e concept of a rational 
subject that is able to make proper choices 
and respons ible decisions is the very 
found a tion of the modern eman cip a tion 
of all those groups that were polit ic ally 
non- exist ent before the middle of the 
nine teenth century: craft s men, labour ers, 
their wives and all those racially and sexu-
ally margin al ized groups that have gained 
civil rights in the past century. 
 Yet, exactly two centur ies later post-
mod ern, eman cip ated indi vidu als have 
gone through a process of tech no lo gical 
enlight en ment that has raised their life 
stand ards to a – glob ally speak ing – dispro-
por tion ate height. Th e average foot print of 
north- west Europeans is nearly four times 
what the earth can produce. In the course 
of modern ity inter ac tions and trans ac tions 
got speeded up. In 1981, two centur ies aft er 
Kant’s public a tion, the  TGV for the ﬁ rst 
time trans por ted people to their holiday 
resorts and busi ness confer ences in France 
by at a top speed of 381 km/h, the space 
shuttle  Columbia encircled the earth, the 
 Voyager 2 arrived at Saturn,  MTV  started 
to broad cast video clips around the clock, 
and  IBM launched its ﬁ rst personal 
computer. A year later, in 1982, the inter net 
protocol suite ( TCP / IP ) was intro duced as 
the stand ard network ing protocol and a 
decade later the World Wide Web, web 
servers, and web browsers connect poten-
tially every one on Earth. Global connectiv-
ity, described in a rhizo matic sense by 
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari in  A 
Th ousand Plateaus (1980), was a fact. By 
now every person has become a node in a 
network. Without real iz ing this trans form-
a tion, because uncrit ic ally stuck in a 
modern, inad equate discourse, twenty- 
ﬁ rst-century schiz oid man has become 
radic ally mediocre. 
 Why schiz oid? Th is posthu man condi-
tion has a tech no lo gical and a psycho lo-
gical aspect. Man and media are fully inter-
twined. Man is a techno- psycho lo gical 
being that by the second decade of the 
third millen nium has intern al ized all 
these medi ations, reor gan iz ing his life 
accord ing to the possib il it ies that these 
media produce. His basic needs are expo-
nen tially redeﬁ ned into volat ile pref er-
ences that are direc ted by the market. How 
does this second nature become ﬁ rst? In 
the western hemi sphere life has become 
very comfort able. Th is comfort able life, 
acquired in the course of 150 years, has 
become ﬁ rst nature. An iPad or iPhone 
nowadays is a primary need, as is a credit 
card and a car. Aft er the initial ‘shock’ that 
always accom pan ies the intro duc tion of a 
new medium, end users learn to handle the 
medium. Gradually they start consum ing 
the comfort, i.e. the aﬄ  u ence of ‘their’ 
media, intern al iz ing it as a basic stand ard. 
For the next gener a tion this comfort has 
become a basic dispos i tion. Th at is why 
propos ing to reduce auto mobil ity and 
discon nect from inter activ ity feels like 
being asked to mutil ate oneself: it is a crip-
pling, blind ing or dumbing inter ven tion. It 
is as if someone is asked to cut oﬀ  a healthy 
leg or pierce a well- func tion ing eye or ear. 
 Th is psycho lo gical upgrad ing is the 
result of tech no lo gical upscal ing. New 
media 
always 
incor por ate 
earlier 
developed media. A smart phone is neither 
a tele phone nor a  TV , let alone a library. It 
is a connec ted digital display that enables 
its users to be every where at every moment, 
writing, speak ing, brows ing and acting, 
choos ing and making tech no lo gic ally pre- 
determ ined decisions. Media produce 
unknown exper i ences, new life styles, and 
even tu ally new needs, albeit strictly in the 
terms of the format. Th e medium becomes 
an exper i ence in itself. It is no longer a 
means to an end. As Marshall McLuhan