PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
OBSOLETE TECHNOLOGIES

classed and gendered schemes of clas si ﬁ c a-
tion. Th e values embed ded in tech no lo gical 
design reﬂ ect exclu sion ary norm at ive 
ideals about such subjectiv ity, and so in this 
entry we develop an account of obsol ete 
tech no lo gies from the perspect ive of femin-
ist science and tech no logy studies in order 
to link the concept of the posthu man with 
the unprob lem at ized and oft en celeb rated 
social death of various tech no lo gies. 
Speciﬁ c arte facts considered fall under 
three broad categor ies: 1) planned obsol es-
cence, e.g. Apple’s hard ware and soft  ware; 
2) celeb rated inven tions that never became 
widely adopted, e.g. Google Glass; and 3) 
mass tech no lo gical fads that quickly died 
out, e.g. the  XO  laptop. In each of these, 
obsol es cence serves as a rupture that opens 
up onto the ideo lo gical substrates of design 
while also inform ing our imagin ar ies of the 
posthu man. 
 Most connec ted to economic rather 
than tech nical constraints, the concept of 
planned obsol es cence became common-
place in modern  US industry through out 
the twen ti eth century, espe cially in the 
postwar years as a means of accel er at ing 
consumer demand ( Cohen 2003 : 293). 
Despite critiques of planned obsol es cence 
that high lighted the arti ﬁ  ci al ity of such 
demand and its attend ant waste ful ness (e.g. 
 Packard 1960 ), both obsol es cence in terms 
of the desirab il ity or cool ness of a product 
as well as obsol es cence in terms of its 
lifespan or func tion al ity continue to be 
used in contem por ary indus trial design of 
consumer goods. One of the more notori-
ous ﬁ rms in this regard is Apple, the 
company at the vanguard of port able tech-
no lo gies that construct and market posthu-
man ism as a mass phenomenon. In order 
to main tain demand levels for its products, 
which satur ate the market, Apple engages 
in planned obsol es cence at the func tional 
level through the rela tion ship between 
hard ware and soft  ware upgrades. Each 
 See also Animism; Neo/New Materialism; 
Posthuman Critical Th eory; Ontological 
Turn; Speculative Posthumanism. 
 Peter Wolfendale 
 OBSOLETE TECHNOLOGIES  
 How and why do tech no lo gies die? Why 
have users come to accept the short lifespan 
of hard ware and soft  ware? Technological 
obsol es cence prompts the ques tion of how 
tech no lo gies, as socio- tech nical assemblages, 
grow less relev ant – a ques tion that becomes 
increas ingly import ant as tech no lo gical life-
cycles seem to speed up accord ing to the 
logics of expo nen tial progress. Moore’s law, 
for example, posits that comput ing power 
doubles roughly every two years, imply ing 
a continual accel er a tion of tech no lo gical 
obsol es cence. But obsol es cence in prac tice 
outstrips such a determ in istic reduc tion, 
espe cially since it is oft en expli citly designed 
into tech no lo gical arte facts as an economic 
imper at ive of accel er ated consump tion. 
 Illustratively, as a result of excess ive 
consump tion, the global quant ity of elec-
tronic waste (e- waste) produced in 2014 
was 41.8 million tons, only 6.5 million of 
which was collec ted by oﬃ   cial take- back 
chan nels in nations across the Global North 
( Baldé et  al. 2015 : 20–5). Th e remain ing 
ﬂ ow of e- waste is processed in informal, 
unsafe and envir on ment ally unpro tec ted 
settings, largely across loca tions in the 
Global South ( LeBel 2012 ). 
 Analyses of planned obsol es cence thus 
oﬀ er a broader critique of consumer society 
that posi tion our desire for the new within 
a series of late capit al ist power dynam ics 
that shape contem por ary subjectiv ity. Th e 
new is deﬁ ned against slower, dumber, 
back ward, dirtier, noisier and/or uncool 
tech no lo gies which oft en reﬂ ect racial ized,