PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
YOUTH

hard ware innov a tions. Default iden tity 
categor ies and domin ant user norms on 
plat forms such as Facebook, Instagram 
and Snapchat revolve around white ness, 
Westernness, 
hetero norm ativ ity 
and 
conven tion ally gendered beauty stand ards. 
Th e time and energy of this target audi ence 
is most readily commod i ﬁ ed as their pres-
ence and selﬁ es, cat videos and tweets 
provide the free virtual labour corpor a tions 
need to attract other main stream users and 
to sell to advert isers. Th is partic u larly 
conﬁ gured 
‘norm at ive, 
virtual 
body’ 
( Nakamura 2011 : 388) is also reﬂ ec ted in 
the major ity of domin ant computer game 
avatars. At least two addi tional groups of 
users, who do not ﬁ t these norms, need to 
be distin guished. Th eir impact on digital 
culture diﬀ ers, and accord ingly they can be 
considered invis ible and hyper vis ible users. 
Invisible users are those non- norm at ive 
users who do not ﬁ t the domin ant imagin-
ary. For example, although for non- elite 
users like youth in inter net cafes in urban 
Ghana the inter net oﬀ ers a site to imagine a 
cosmo pol itan self, the inter net simul tan-
eously remains a ‘foreign commod ity’ for 
them ( Burrell 2012 : 51). Many youth there 
struggle to decode the impli cit ‘Euro-
American codes of social inter ac tion’ and as 
a result they are met with silence or aggres-
sion in their online encoun ters (ibid.: 5). 
Hypervisible users, on the other side of the 
spec trum, are noticed and ques tioned 
exactly because they do not ﬁ t the domin-
ant imagin ary of the user. A case in point is 
the Autumn 2015 European media- frenzy 
scru tin iz ing why Syrian refugees who ﬂ ee 
their war- torn country carry a smart phone. 
Th ose using commu nic a tion devices are 
either depic ted as bogus asylum seekers or 
they are considered unﬁ t to handle 
advanced tech no lo gies. Such frames replic-
ate histor ical narrat ives of other ing, depict-
ing racial ized bodies as somehow ‘cultur ally 
handi capped’ and tech nologic ally back ward 
( Gómez-Peña 2000 : 80–1). A recent 
 Independent news pa per head line aptly 
captured the skewed debate: ‘Surprised that 
Syrian refugees have smart phones? Sorry to 
break this to you, but you’re an idiot. You 
don’t need to be a white west erner to own 
a relat ively cheap piece of tech no logy’ 
( Malley 2015 ). In sum, rather than a norm-
at ive virtual body, the category of the 
posthu man user is intern ally diverse and 
combines posi tions of mater ial and 
symbolic oppres sion and priv ilege.  
 Disposal 
 Finally, consid er ing what happens aft er the 
use- value of digital tech no lo gies expires – 
once tech no lo gies become obsol ete by 
choice or design – invokes the typic ally 
invis ible context of tech no logy disposal 
and e- waste. Th e posthu man poten ti al it ies 
of the Global North’s imma ter ial fetish 
objects become recast as mater ial ruins for 
the Global South. For instance, Ghana’s 
e- waste dumps provide an addi tional 
layer of mater ial context over youth 
subjectiv it ies in the inform a tion economy 
( Burrell 2012 ). Situated just outside Accra, 
Agbogbloshie is a former wetland turned 
e- waste dump that oft en illeg ally takes in 
discarded elec tron ics both domest ic ally 
and from Europe and North America. 
Th e dump has proven to emit signi ﬁ c ant 
pollut ants into surround ing land, air and 
water, in partic u lar from the prac tice of 
burning elec tron ics. Th ese pollut ants aﬀ ect 
the local ﬂ ora and fauna, includ ing humans 
and espe cially chil dren, whose repro duct-
ive and neural devel op ment is inhib ited by 
the toxic chem ic als emitted from burning 
e- waste. Moreover, such e- waste dumps 
not only in Ghana but also in Nigeria, 
Pakistan, India and China tend to be popu-
lated by the most impov er ished young 
people in those coun tries, oft en young 
girls, trying to ﬁ nd any mater i als from