PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STATELESS STATE

integ ra tion into the state of Mali. From 
1960 on, the year of Malian inde pend ence, 
the Kel Tamasheq rebelled in demand of 
their own autonomy, most recently in 
2012, when the organ iz a tion declared their 
inde pend ent state of Azawad in the north-
ern part of the country, one and a half 
times the size of France. Writer and  MNLA 
repres ent at ive Moussa Ag Assarid says: 
 I have met many men and women who 
ﬁ ght for educa tion and art, who make 
beau ti ful works in the form of the calli-
graphy that now covers our city and 
declares itself part of Azawad, and great 
poets who roam the streets and speak to 
the chil dren. In the  MNLA  we have 
women and men who make history. And 
our history is now; it is construc ted day 
by day. Every element, every person, each 
ﬁ ghter is an actor in our common Azawad. 
 Assarid and Staal 2013 : 42 
 Similar to the Filipino leader Professor 
Sison, who famously wrote that ‘the guer illa 
is a poet’ ( Sison 2013 ), Ag Assarid emphas-
izes how the revolu tion ary struggle is 
simul tan eously a cultural struggle, calling 
each politi cized subject in the struggle for 
inde pend ence an ‘actor’. Th e Kel Tamasheq 
do not ﬁ ght merely with arms, but through 
a politi ciz a tion of their own history, 
language and cultural symbol ism that they 
have had to defend over decades from 
foreign occu pa tion. In this regard, Ag 
Assarid mentions partic u larly the work of 
the Kel Tamasheq band Tinariwen (trans-
lated as ‘Deserts’), which consists of former 
revolu tion ary ﬁ ght ers who travel the world 
to narrate the history of the revolu tion 
through their own language and tradi-
tional music. Ag Assarid explains: 
 Tinariwen is . . . unique in that their music 
is passed on through cassette tapes. Th e 
cassettes are the weapons that make our 
message travel: a message of revolt, but 
also a message of peace. In times of revolt, 
the music reminds us of our goal of peace. 
In times of peace, we are reminded of the 
revolt that laid its found a tion.  
 Assarid and Staal 2013 : 42 
 In the case of the Kurdish revolu tion ary 
move ment – occu pied by what the 
Kurdistan Workers Party ( PKK ) has 
named the ‘inter- colony’ of Kurdistan, the 
land of the Kurds being separ ated through 
the coun tries of Turkey, Syria, Iraq and 
Iran – the notion of the state less state as 
enacted through cultural work gains addi-
tional import ance due to the fact that their 
struggle for self- determ in a tion has come 
to reject the concept of the nation- state 
alto gether. Co- founded by women and 
men in 1978, Abdullah Öcalan and Sakine 
Cansiz being the best known today, the 
 PKK grew quickly through its eﬀ ect ive 
guer rilla struggle against the Turkish state 
into a mass move ment in the 1980s. 
 Initially 
groun ded 
on 
Marxism-
Leninism, the  PKK aimed at estab lish ing 
an inde pend ent Kurdish nation- state. But 
women in the ranks of the guer ril las felt 
margin al ized from the struggle along the 
way, due to the fact that many men did 
not recog nize them as equal ﬁ ght ers and 
expec ted them to dedic ate them selves to 
care work instead. Öcalan, who had been 
the polit ical leader of the  PKK from 
the start, suppor ted the women’s move-
ment to develop autonom ously within the 
 PKK  in order to protect their stake in 
the revolu tion. 
 Both Öcalan and the women’s move-
ment concluded that the struc ture of the 
nation- state essen tially consists of the 
culmin a tion of patri archy and capit al ist 
imper i al ism. A repres ent at ive of the 
Kurdish Women’s Movement, Dilar Dirik, 
in this light rhet or ic ally asks: ‘Could we 
have a nation- state, a concept inher ently 
based on capit al ism and patri archy, and 
still think of ourselves as liber ated?’ ( In der 
Maur, Staal and Dirik 2013 : 52).