PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GEO-HYDRO-SOLAR-BIO-TECHNO-POLITICS

rowers there is less neces sity for the high- 
intens ity train ing needed for noble single 
combat. Phalanx train ing was inter me di ate 
between aris to cratic single combat and 
naval rowing; it is less intense than single 
combat, because of team work; that is, 
emer gence. In the phalanx, you stand by 
your comrades rather than surge ahead as 
did the Homeric heroes for whom staying 
in line would be cowardly. 
 Th e discrep ancy between phalanx 
soldierly courage and Homeric warrior 
courage is an excel lent example of the need 
to over come essen tial ism: you will never 
come up with a set of neces sary and suﬃ  -
cient condi tions to deﬁ ne ‘courage’, so it is 
much better to invest ig ate the morpho gen-
esis of warrior and soldierly bodies politic: 
how are the warrior and the soldier dif-
ferent actu al iz a tions of the virtual multi -
pli city linking polit ical physiology and 
geo- hydro-solar- polit ics? Th e prac tice of 
march ing and stand ing together is the 
key to the civic and somatic bodies politic 
expressed by the phalanx. As we will see 
in a moment, William McNeill’s  Keeping 
Together in Time allows us to account 
for this bonding in terms of collect ive 
reson at ing move ment provok ing the 
entrain ment of asub ject ive physiolo gical 
processes support ing emotional attach-
ment ( McNeill 1995 : 117). 
 But before we go below the subject ive 
level 
to 
entrain ment 
and 
polit ical 
physiology, we should note its comple-
ment in the supra- subject ive mater i al ist 
explan a tion of Athenian foreign policy 
by the noted Marxist histor ian, G. E. M. 
de Ste Croix. In   Th e Origins of the 
Peloponnesian War   (1972) and again in 
 Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World 
(1981), Ste Croix points out that the geo- 
polit ical key to the trans ition from 
Athenian demo cracy at home to the 
‘Athenian Empire’ aft er the Persian Wars is 
the threshold of human energy produc-
tion from grain inges tion. Ste Croix uses 
this to under cut ideo lo gical explan a tions 
of Athenian foreign policy: ‘I have . . . 
explained why Athens was driven by her 
unique situ ation, as an importer of corn 
on an alto gether excep tional scale, toward 
a policy of “naval imper i al ism”, in order to 
secure her supply routes’ (1981: 293). Th e 
singu lar it ies in the Athenian actu al iz a tion 
of the geo- hydro-bio- polit ical multi pli city 
are what get us out of ideo lo gical condem-
na tions of a supposed Athenian ‘lust for 
power.’ As Ste Croix points out, rower- 
powered warships had a much shorter 
range than sail- driven merchant ships, 
which are able to capture solar energy in 
form of wind power – itself gener ated 
from a multi pli city of temper at ure diﬀ er-
en tials of land mass/sea/water currents 
produ cing wind currents (1972: 47–9; see 
also  Gomme 1933 ). So the Athenian 
demo crats needed a network of friendly 
regimes whose ports could provide food 
and rest for the rowers of their triremes. 
Th at is, to use our termin o logy, to replen-
ish the biolo gical solar energy conver sion 
units of the triremes qua ‘man- driven 
torpedo[es]’ 
( Gabrielsen 
2001 : 
73). 
Bringing the geo- hydro-solar dimen sions 
of the multi pli city together with bio- 
tech nical and more tradi tion ally socio- 
polit ical dimen sions, a recent schol arly 
article puts it this way: ‘the concept of 
 thalas sokra tia [sea- power] implies intense 
naval activ ity, primar ily in order to defend 
exist ing bases and to acquire new ones, and 
intense naval activ ity, in its turn, requires 
command over enorm ous mater ial and 
ﬁ nan cial resources’ ( Gabrielsen 2001 : 74). 
Adopting this view point allows us to 
under stand the supra- subject ive and anti- 
ideo lo gical mater i al ism of a key passage 
from Ste Croix: 
  Athens’ whole way of life was involved; 
and what is so oft en denounced, as if it