PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ZOMBIE

and the reality that comes aft er. From their 
Haitian fore fath ers, they cari ca ture an 
appear ance that combines staring, unsee-
ing eyes, skin stuck to their bones, and 
clumsy move ments, with phys ical strength, 
inert ness and insens it iv ity – making them 
invul ner able. No doubt, cine matic zombies 
reﬂ ect an old millen nial Christian idea of 
immor tal ity of the soul. In a way, they are 
immor tal souls. Not only their name, 
zombie, must derive from the Kongo word 
for the soul,  nzambi , but their very exist-
ence points to the impossib il ity of dying: 
zombies are undead souls wander ing 
around within dead bodies which they 
animate. Th ink about their brain: in a great 
many movies, one can only kill the zombie 
by destroy ing its brain ( Lauro and Embry 
2008 : 95). A zombie’s brain might embody 
what Christians call the soul. It is an 
aft er life of the human, whose prop erly 
human char ac ter ist ics have now vanished. 
Moreover, if we continue to consider it 
within the frame work of the Christian 
narrat ive, the zombie is liter ally the resur-
rec ted. She lost everything: her name, her 
memor ies, her iden tity, her entire life, but 
some thing else rises up instead, when the 
dead are awakened. 
 By their fourth season, zombies propose 
an  eman cip at ory poten tial. Th ey are the 
surviv ors – not only of the apoca lypse, but 
they are the surviv ors over them selves. 
Th ey survived; that is, they left  behind, 
together with their human prop er ties, all 
of what made them depend ent on some-
thing. Th ere are no more sorcer ers: post- 
apoca lyptic zombies are without a master. 
Th ey survived their own slavery, be it the 
slavery of produc tion or the slavery of 
consump tion. Th ey went beyond human ity 
with its master- and-slave dialectics. Th us, 
in George A. Romero’s ﬁ lms zombies 
acquire class- conscious ness and, as the 
lower strata of the oppressed, complete 
what one might call ahistor ical mission of 
the prolet ariat – namely, to have done with 
capit al ism. Th ey do what human beings fail 
to do. Th ey learn how to organ ize a new 
type of collect ive, which does not consist of 
human indi vidu als, but is only based on the 
despair of those who have liter ally nothing 
to lose: even their bodies have already lost 
their integ rity. Instead of any kind of hope, 
they are driven by despair, and it is in 
despair that they do the impossible. Th ey 
have passed through the stage of an abso-
lute negat iv ity, through the end of the 
world, through death and decom pos i tion 
and through hell in order to pave the way 
for the posthu man revolu tion ary subjectiv-
ity; if someone does not like what it looks 
like, the zombie does not care. 
 However, before this, the ambi val ence 
between the zombie as a geohis tor ic ally 
and racially produced ﬁ gure, and as one 
formed in the alien a tion of produc tion under 
modern ity must also be atten ded to as 
one in which the history of colo ni al ism is 
scrubbed from the history of capit al ism by 
this trans- histor ical and trans- loca tional 
shift  of the zombie from a cultur ally con-
tin gent prac tice into one of a cultur ally 
produced imagin a tion. 
 See also Animacies; Animism; Non- 
human Agency; Static Glow. 
 Note 
 1. Research into this phenomenon can be 
found, for example in Davis 1985, 1988; 
 Cohen 1972 . 
 Oxana Timofeeva
Adorno ,  T. W. ( 1997 ),  Aesthetic Th eory , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Agamben ,  G. ( 1998 ),  Homo Sacer:  Sovereign 
Power and Bare Life ,  Stanford :  Stanford 
University Press . 
 Agamben ,  G. ( 2000 ), ‘ Beyond Human Rights ’, 
in  Means Without End: