PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN MUSEUM PRACTICES

new mater i al isms ( Bennett 2010 ) and 
relev ant tech nical, scientiﬁ c and histor ical 
inform a tion. Th e plastic of which the 
bucket is made comprises a series of tight 
inter de pend ences from its histor ical gene-
a logy in respect to the devel op ment of 
plastic, its human actants such as civil 
engin eers, and its sequences of produc tion 
from its mater i als (carbon, oil, polymer) to 
molten plastic, pres sure and injec tion 
mould ing. By gath er ing together the 
actants that make up the ‘compos i tion’ and 
re- assem bling them in new types of rela-
tions we can consider the perform at ive 
eﬀ ects of their inter de pend en cies and 
aﬀ ord ances overall as a distributive agency 
(see  Bennett 2010 : viii). With the primary 
agency of ﬁ re, for example, its aﬀ ord ances, 
includ ing its phys ical and chem ical prop er-
ties, refer to a series of tight inter de pend-
ences that exhibit diﬀ er ent tempor al it ies, 
clus ter ings, taut ness and enabling eﬀ ects 
that cohere in certain ways around the 
bucket. For example, temper at ures above 
40 degrees Celsius, climate change as an 
agency aﬀ orded by humans, inter ac ted 
with other aﬀ ord ances such as wind speed 
and the rapid oxid a tion of the Australian 
bush in the exothermic chem ical process of 
combus tion, releas ing heat, light and 
smoke that enabled the Kilmore East ﬁ re to 
emerge and converge on Bill Putt’s prop-
erty and the bucket. Th is sequence is locked 
into a series of other folded, entangled and 
embed ded rela tions (organic and non- 
organic vital it ies, discourses and mater i al-
it ies), a failed water pump, the bucket’s 
form and spout as an aﬀ ord ance to hold 
and pour water, the chem ical compos i tion 
of plastic combined with radiant heat and 
its molten eﬀ ects, Bill’s fear of loss, dying 
live stock, burning build ings and the act of 
running. As a ‘compos i tion’ the green 
bucket is no longer a static thing; rather it 
emerges through multiple loca tions, and as 
the eﬀ ect of its distri bu tion across many 
the bundles of mater ial, tech nical, concep-
tual, ecolo gical, social and emotional 
compon ents that make up its distrib uted 
assemblage. Th is assort ment of conat ive 
things comprises not only human bodies 
and the human subject, Bill Putt, his bodily 
actions and his stories; but also its other 
multi far i ous 
elements: 
the 
bucket’s 
processes of produc tion, its geograph ical 
loca tion, its exten ded histor ies from the 
deep past to its museo lo gical ascrip tion, and 
its mater ial and non- human features and 
form. To this end, the list comprises plastic, 
carbon, hydro gen, oil, coal, poly mers, mud, 
ﬁ re, moulds, digital code, climate change, 
temper at ure, wind speed, Strathewen, 
Victoria, 7 February 2009, mud brick house, 
failed water pump, curat ors, collec tion 
managers, docu ment a tion proced ures and 
so forth, some of whom were previ ously 
invis ible in its formal object descrip tion. 
From this onto lo gic ally diverse list of conat-
ive elements, Bill and his subjectiv it ies 
there fore become just one of many actants 
that inter mingle with the other compon ents 
of the compos i tion. In doing so I draw 
inspir a tion from the argu ment of Olsen 
et al. ( 2012 ) that people, objects, mater i al ity 
and the discurs ive do not operate in onto lo-
gic ally distinct ive realms. 
 Th e list also oper ates as a mech an ism 
for re- ascrib ing each of its compon ents as 
‘actants’ (vital subjects). Th is task re- works 
agency away from the human to acknow-
ledge the bucket’s multiple agen cies includ-
ing its mater i al it ies, phys ical form and 
multi far i ous 
discurs ive 
and 
aﬀ ect ive 
framing (i.e. scientiﬁ c, histor ical, cultural, 
ideo lo gical, thoughts, desires). 
 In order to attrib ute agen cies and 
aﬀ ord ances to each of the bucket’s elements 
(for example biolo gical, elemental, ecolo-
gical processes, tech nical and tech no lo gical 
processes, 
human 
actions, 
thoughts, 
desires), I draw on liter at ure in the post -
hu man it ies ( Braidotti 2013 ;  Hodder 2012 ),