PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
METAMODERNISM

culture. Others, like Nicolas Bourriaud 
( 2009 ), locate it in the creol iz a tion of the 
arts. Gilles Lipovetsky’s sugges tion for why 
post mod ern ism is out of vogue is hyper-
con sump tion (2005). Th ere are those who 
point to 9/11 and those who focus on the 
ﬁ nan cial crisis, those who single out climate 
change and those who look at post- colo ni-
al ism, object- oriented philo sophy and the 
New Sincerity, the birth of the cyborg and 
the aft er life of human ism. In some cases, 
post mod ern ism is considered old hat 
because culture has changed beyond recog-
ni tion; in others, it is said to be inad equate 
because its tropes have intens i ﬁ ed (see for 
instance  Nealon 2012 ). Many schol ars 
reject the notion of the post mod ern enthu-
si ast ic ally (because they take issue with its 
supposed moral relativ ism, or with pastiche, 
or with post struc tur al ism; see Eshelman’s 
plea for perform at ism (2008), as well as, 
more recently, the program matic philo-
sophies of spec u lat ive realism and accel er a-
tion ism), but there are also plenty who 
abandon it grudgingly. 
 Th e notion of metamod ern ism has 
been developed – neither rever en tially nor 
reluct antly – in dialogue with Fredric 
Jameson’s deﬁ n i tion of post mod ern ism as 
the cultural logic of late capit al ism (1991). 
Here, what is meant by post mod ern ism is 
the ‘senses of an end’ that by the late 
eighties had come to permeate (western) 
polit ics and culture, from Th atcher’s 
 TINA to punk’s ‘no future’, from Andy 
Warhol’s obses sion with surfaces to 
Foucault’s dismissal of psycho ana lysis, the 
eclecticism of Robert Venturi’s archi tec-
ture to Fukuyama’s End of History,  Body 
Heat’s pastiche to the disin teg ra tion of 
the Cartesian subject. In this context, the 
metamod ern struc ture of feeling can be 
described as the belief that this ‘end’ was 
called all too hastily and/or oppor tun ist ic-
ally. Ranging from the popular ity of David 
Foster Wallace’s essays on earn est ness to 
the onset of the twenty- ﬁ rst century. My 
concise account here consists of three 
parts: the end of post mod ern ism; post- 
post mod ern expres sions in arts, culture 
and polit ics; and the metamod ern turn. 
 Th ough, judging from the text books, 
there is still little consensus about what 
post mod ern ism entails, exactly – the 
cultural logic of late capit al ism, an eman-
cip at ory program, a styl istic register char-
ac ter ized by eclecticism, para taxis and 
pastiche, a philo soph ical debate calling 
into ques tion the univer sal iz ing truth 
claims of nine teenth- century academia, or 
a fashion fad, among many others – many 
now believe that the concep tual category 
describes a phenomenon of the past. From 
Josh Toth’s  Th e Passing of Postmodernism 
(2010) to Alan Kirby’s ‘Th e Death of 
Postmodernism and Beyond’ (2006) to the 
V&A’s 2012 obit u ary  Postmodernism: Style 
and Subversion, 1970–1990 , there is a sense 
that the post mod ern idiom, if not entirely 
outdated, is no longer suﬃ   cient to describe 
contem por ary culture. As Linda Hutcheon, 
one of the most pres ci ent critics of the 
post mod ern, wrote in the post script to 
 Th e Politics of Postmodernism , ‘Let’s face it: 
it’s over.’ 
 Th e post mod ern moment has passed, 
even if its discurs ive strategies and its 
ideo lo gical critique continue to live on – 
as do those of modern ism – in our 
contem por ary twenty- ﬁ rst-century world 
. . . histor ical categor ies like modern ism 
and post mod ern ism are, aft er all, only 
heur istic labels that we create in our 
attempts to chart cultural changes and 
continu it ies. 
 2002: 165–6 
 Given the confu sion around the notion of 
the post mod ern, the reasons for its 
perceived outdated ness depend on whose 
account you read. For Kirby ( 2009 ), it 
should be sought in the digit iz a tion of