PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTANIMALISM

vital ist) tradi tions (rarely discussed in the 
Christian and modern liter at ure on the 
animal), appear to have long and fascin at-
ing histor ies. Th e prac tice of ‘mumming’, for 
instance, coming from the Greek  mummo 
(denot ing a child’s bugbear, or a fright en ing 
mask), was a folk tradi tion absorbed in 
Italian masquer ade (and hence in other 
courtly enter tain ment known as masque) 
from the sixteenth century, but has a much 
longer history (stretch ing out until today) 
outside 
of 
Christian 
High 
Culture. 
Originally, mummers were bands of masked 
persons who during winter fest ivals in 
Europe paraded the streets and entered 
houses to dance or play dice in silence. 
 In relat ively new ﬁ elds like Nordic 
Studies, there is partic u lar interest in how 
local tradi tions and customs survived at the 
margins of Christianity, in partic u lar on 
those remote islands where the  res extensa 
of myth o logy and magic was less under 
pres sure. Terry Gunnell stresses the import-
ance of mumming in these communit ies, as 
it stressed the powers of the seasons, of the 
envir on ment (the sea espe cially), reveal ing 
them what Muensterberger famously called 
their ‘semi- human reality’ ( Gunnell 2007 : 
28). Th e extens ive use of masks, of cross- 
dress ing, in many ways prac tices an idea of 
human ity that is far from modern, that 
does not posi tion itself as opposed to the 
animal and to the world but that seems to 
be in search for situ at ing a series of bonds, 
knots and connec tions between all of the 
things that matter in the here and now. 
 As one of the core founders and part of 
the curat orial team I’ve set up the  Papay 
Gyro Nights Art Festival (co- founded and co- 
curated with Ivanov), organ ized every year 
in the heart of the dark and cold winter on 
the remote island of Papa Westray (locally 
known as Papay), in the far north of 
Scotland. Th e aim of this fest ival was to 
create a stage where this discov ery and 
redis cov ery of the strong postan imal and 
Spinoza). Th e domin a tion of Christianity 
(tran scend ental Platonism) and Cartesian 
dualism, however, made sure that the 
animal only up until very recently received 
serious atten tion from the History of 
Th ought. Metempsychosis itself only knew 
a short revival in nine teenth century (it has 
been discussed in the writ ings of Melville, 
Joyce, Pynchon and Proust, among others), 
where it was exper i mented with but more 
oft en ridiculed. 
 Simondon is right when he uses 
dialectics to analyse this history of man and 
animal, but contrary to the tradi tional 
Hegelian use of the term (dialectics), which 
is concerned with a posit ive devel op ment, a 
more frag men ted dialect ical analysis would 
make more sense. And this espe cially 
concerns the synthetic posi tion which, as 
Simondon himself noted above, cannot be 
seen as a grand conclu sion, but concerns 
a much more modest search for the possi -
b il it ies of animal (and human) life. Th us, 
like posthu man ist theor ies of today, post -
an im al ism too has a spec u lat ive nature. 
 For postan im al ism this means that 
think ing in terms of ‘kinds’ and of qual it ies 
ascribed to these kinds, is long left  behind. 
Th us, postan im al ism is in partic u lar 
concerned with the revital iz a tion of the 
long history of human- and-animal/animal- 
and-human rela tion ships as it has been 
developed in the minor  non-Christian 
histor ies (and folk tales), that have survived 
modern ity, as they had survived Christianity. 
Rediscovering these strong but oft en 
neglected tradi tions in the reality of today, 
and thus rewrit ing them into the Grand 
History that had no place for them before, 
the micro pol it ics of postan im al ism doesn’t 
synthes ize the History of Man and Animal 
at all; it excav ates it, hollows it out, repla cing 
Major History with a series of situ ated 
narrat ives. 
 It is inter est ing to ﬁ nd out that quite a 
few of these non-Christian (pagan, animist,