PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
VIBRANT MATTER

Vibrant Matter ( Bennett 2010 ) aims to 
enhance the  percept ib il ity of non- human 
forms of agency, where ‘agency’ refers to 
the capa city to inﬂ ect the direc tion of 
events and to make a diﬀ er ence to 
outcomes. Th e book tells an onto- story 
that plays with and begins to play out the 
idea that non- human things and forces 
actively shape the bodies they encounter, 
includ ing the humans who never fully 
possess or control them. Here the ﬁ gures 
of ‘thing- power’, ‘vital mater i al ity’ and 
‘vibrant matter’ are invoked. Th e short 
book also describes, and attempts to revive, 
aspects of past (Euro-American) onto lo-
gies or cosmo lo gies, wherein non- human 
bodies and processes were more sharply 
exper i enced as enter ing into, and enabling 
and constrain ing,  human action. 
 Th e book draws examples from contem-
por ary polit ical culture (concern ing food, 
abor tion, energy policy, a polit ical economy 
of extrac tion and waste), as well as from 
the work of Spinoza, Kant, the ‘crit ical vital-
ists’ Henri Bergson and Hans Driesch, 
Th oreau, Darwin, Gilles Deleuze and 
Bruno Latour – in order to make the case 
that  human  agency is itself an assemblage 
of human and non- human powers. When 
humans act, they do not exer cise exclus-
ively human capab il it ies, but express and 
engage a variety of other  actants , which is 
Latour’s term for an entity or a process that 
makes a diﬀ er ence to the direc tion of a 
larger assemblage without that diﬀ er ence 
being redu cible to an eﬃ   cient cause. 
Actants collab or ate, divert, vital ize, gum 
up, twist or turn the group ings in which 
they parti cip ate; or, as archae olo gists Chris 
Gosden or Lambros Malafouris argue, 
tools actively consti tute the styles and 
powers of human cogni tion and memory. 
If moderns tend to default to the assump-
tion – oft en for the sake of main tain ing the 
ideal of indi vidual moral respons ib il ity – 
that the most potent actants in a group are 
human beings, the book suggests that, in 
many cases, human inten tions, striv ings 
or delib er ate activ it ies are  not the key 
oper at ors. Sometimes, that role is played by 
a weather- event, or a food stuﬀ , chem ical, 
metal or phar ma ceut ical (or their sounds, 
smells, silent move ments, rhythms and 
momentums). To really acknow ledge the 
force of these other players would be to 
enhance our ability to detect with more 
subtlety what was, in a given case, the 
actual mech an ism of a partic u lar eﬀ ect – 
such as, for example, a black out or an oil 
spill or climate change or a gun culture. 
 One import ant example in  Vibrant 
Matter concerns the multiple agen cies at 
work to produce the elec tri city black out in 
2003 in North America (and later in the 
year in Europe). Th e govern ment and 
industry response in the  US  was to seek to 
identify some human – some Enron exec-
ut ive or energy trader – who was respons-
ible and then to punish him. Meanwhile, 
a whole series of other rela tion ships – 
between the elec tri city grid as infra struc-
ture, the legis la tion dereg u lat ing energy 
trading, the constant egging- on of the 
desire to consume, desire, and the natural 
tend en cies of elec tri city itself remained 
under- explored. As a result, the possib il ity 
of black outs today remains more or less 
the same. Th e fetish of the exclus ively 
human agent and the asso ci ated tend ency 
to deﬁ ne social prob lems as moral fail ures 
– and the impli cit assump tion that it is we 
humans who are always in charge – 
preven ted analysts from discern ing that 
the real locus of agency was an assemblage 
– of human and non- human actants. And 
it also preven ted us from pursu ing more 
 eﬀ ect ive forms of inter ven tion into that 
speciﬁ c conﬁ g ur a tion. Here the point is a 
prag matic one: ethics and polit ics can 
some times have more trac tion on mater ial