PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
METADATA SOCIETY

soci et ies. But the machines don’t explain 
anything, you have to analyze the collect-
ive arrange ments of which the machines 
are just one compon ent.  
 Deleuze 1990 
 In his famous ‘Postscript on the Societies 
of Control’ Deleuze envi sioned a form of 
power that is no longer based on the 
produc tion of indi vidu als but on the 
modu la tion of  dividu als . Individuals are 
decon struc ted into numeric foot prints, or 
 dividu als, that are admin is trated through 
‘data banks’: ‘We no longer ﬁ nd ourselves 
dealing with the mass/indi vidual pair. 
Individuals have become “dividu als”, and 
masses, samples, data, markets, or “banks”.’ 
( Deleuze 1992b ) 
 Th e  dividual mirrors and follows the 
idea of  objectile that Deleuze discusses in 
 Th e Fold (1993). Th e  dividu als do not 
simply describe an atom ized subject but 
make possible the posthu man consol id a-
tion of collect ive agents as  condi vidu als, or 
as  super jects. As Deleuze says, follow ing 
Whitehead: ‘Just as the object becomes 
objectile, the subject becomes a super ject’ 
(1993: 21). 1 At least in the domain of the 
digital, data and metadata can be 
considered the  dividu als that are used to 
compose new  super jects , as when data-
bases are used to map social patterns and 
fore cast social trends. As Savat ( 2009 ) 
rightly observes, regard ing the new tech-
niques of modu la tion within the society of 
control, ‘the newly emer ging mode of 
obser va tion is pattern recog ni tion.’ 
 Politics 
 Placing too much stress on the deﬁ n i tion 
of the control society might not leave space 
for polit ical imagin a tion and posthu man 
traject or ies. Deleuze was wonder ing about 
the polit ical outcomes of Foucault’s notion 
of biopol it ics, ‘had he not trapped himself 
within the concept of power rela tions?’ 
organ iz a tions are divided into three 
categor ies: those who create data (both 
consciously and by leaving digital foot-
prints), those who have the means to 
collect it, and those who have the expert-
ise to analyze it. 
 Interestingly, William Gibson’s original 
vision of cyber space was also about an 
‘inﬁ n ite data s cape’ rather than real istic 
spaces of virtual reality or hyper tex tual 
networks: ‘A graphic repres ent a tion of data 
abstrac ted from the banks of every 
computer in the human system. Unthinkable 
complex ity. Lines of light ranged in the 
nonspace of the mind, clusters and constel-
la tions of data. Like city lights, reced ing’ 
( Gibson 1984 ). Gibson’s intu ition of the 
cyber space was already about the problem 
of  meta- navig a tion of vast data oceans. 
 Deleuze registered a similar shift , that is 
from Foucault’s discip lin ary society based 
on the produc tion of the indi vidual to the 
society of control whose power would be 
based on ‘data banks’ and the  modu la tion 
of ﬂ ows of commu nic a tion. 
 We’re deﬁ n itely moving toward ‘control’ 
soci et ies that are no longer exactly discip-
lin ary. Foucault’s oft en taken as the theor-
ist of discip lin ary soci et ies and of their 
prin cipal tech no logy, conﬁ ne ment (not 
just in hospit als and prisons, but in 
schools, factor ies, and barracks). But he 
was actu ally one of the ﬁ rst to say that 
we’re moving away from discip lin ary soci-
et ies, we’ve already left  them behind. We’re 
moving toward control soci et ies that no 
longer operate by conﬁ n ing people but 
through continu ous control and instant 
commu nic a tion . . . One can of course see 
how each kind of society corres ponds to a 
partic u lar kind of machine – with simple 
mech an ical machines corres pond ing to 
sover eign 
soci et ies, 
thermo- dynamic 
machines to discip lin ary soci et ies, cyber-
netic machines and computers to control