PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TECHNICITY

with the fact that it oﬀ ers an oper a tional 
theory of tech no lo gical medi ation. 
 Despite 
his 
talk 
about 
essences, 
Simondon breaks away from substan tial ist 
notions of iden tity, includ ing the hylo-
morphic variety (see  Metastability ). First, a 
tech nical essence owes its origin to an act 
of inven tion. To begin with the tech nical 
object is ‘prim it ive’ and discon nec ted. Yet it 
contin ues to be inven ted, to evolve in ways 
that are not completely fore seen by the 
inventor(s). Second, a tech nical essence is 
fecund. It evolves by engen der ing a series of 
vari ations or a ‘family’ of tech nical objects 
(51–3). A tech nical object ‘exists . . . like a 
speciﬁ c type obtained through a conver gent 
series’ (26) 2 that, in Simondonian parlance, 
progresses from an ‘abstract’ to a ‘concrete’ 
mode of exist ence. A tech nical essence 
evolves through a process of indi vidu ation 
(see  Metastability ), which in the case of 
tech nical objects is further speciﬁ ed as a 
process of ‘concret iz a tion’. An evolved tech-
nical object is more ‘concrete’ than a prim it-
ive or ‘abstract’ tech nical object, in that its 
elements are more func tion ally coher ent, 
approach ing the internal coher ence of living 
being. In addi tion to that, and again in 
analogy with living being, it incor por ates 
parts of the natural world into its system by 
enter ing into a rela tion with its envir on ment 
( milieu ). Th us, through the process of 
concret iz a tion, the tech nical object loses its 
arti ﬁ  cial char ac ter and approaches the mode 
of exist ence of natural objects. In becom ing 
more concrete, the tech nical object comes 
closer to consti tut ing a natural system; it 
‘natur al izes itself’ by incor por at ing parts of 
the natural world into its regime of func-
tion ing 
(57). 
Challenging 
estab lished 
distinc tions, Simondon refers to the process 
of concret iz a tion as ‘a natural tech nical evol-
u tion’ (52). 
 Th e evolved tech nical object is char ac-
ter ized by its ener getic coup ling to an asso-
ci ated envir on ment. It is here – in its 
concep tion of the way the tech nical object 
relates to its envir on ment – that Simondon’s 
oper a tional approach demon strates its 
true capa city to over come entrenched 
patterns of think ing. For the concret iz ing 
inven tion is not simply an adapt ive reac-
tion to a pre- exist ing envir on ment. Concre-
 tization, rather, is a process that ‘condi tions 
the birth of an envir on ment’, which in turn 
becomes ‘the condi tion of possib il ity of the 
func tion ing of the tech nical object’ (68). 3 
In Simondon’s view, tech nical being is 
self- condi tion ing – but only in a very 
pecu liar sense, since it is at once condi tion 
and condi tioned. Technical being creates 
around itself a certain regime of natural 
elements that it depends on for its func-
tion ing – which means that it condi tions 
the asso ci ated envir on ment just as much 
as it is itself condi tioned by it. 
 Despite his acknow ledge ment of the 
construct ive role of the tech nical object, 
Simondon main tains that the asso ci ated 
envir on ment is not fabric ated. Th e asso ci-
ated envir on ment is a ‘third’ or ‘mixed’ 
envir on ment that is at once tech nical and 
geograph ical, and that acts as a ‘medi ator of 
the rela tion between fabric ated tech nical 
elements and natural elements in which the 
tech nical being func tions’ (70). 4 On the 
same grounds, he claims that the tech nical 
oper a tion is not arbit rary. Simondon’s focus 
on oper a tions provides an escape from the 
dilemma of caus al ity and ﬁ nal ity. Certainly, 
machines are made for a purpose; but as 
Simondon makes clear, through the process 
of indi vidu ation ‘this external ﬁ nal ity is 
erased to the beneﬁ t of the internal co-
her ence of the func tion ing’ (167). 5 Nor can 
the process of tech nical indi vidu ation be 
explained in terms of caus al ity in its ordin-
ary sense. It is the analogy with living beings 
that provides a way out of the dilemma. 
Concretization is ‘organic’ in the sense that 
the system tends toward internal coher ence. 
Technical elements integ rate them selves in a