PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MATTERING

entit ies, how can we claim to observe that 
system’s evol u tion in isol a tion? Th is insight 
suggests that we completely rethink 
dynam ics. With matter ing, ‘the very nature 
of change and the possib il it ies for change 
changes in an ongoing fashion as part of 
the world’s . . . dynam ism’ ( Barad 2007 : 
179). A perform at ive under stand ing of 
matter, in other words, alters the very 
nature of change and caus al ity. 
 Causality, the core prin ciple of clas sical 
dynam ics, suggests that change occurs 
when one discrete entity (cause) inﬂ u ences 
another (eﬀ ect), where both the caus at ive 
and eﬀ ect ive agents pre- exist their rela tion. 
However, once we replace caus al ity with 
perform ativ ity as our central dynamic 
prin ciple, the concept of change changes. 
Change is no longer a ques tion of what 
causes what, but of what coex ists with what. 
Th e rules of Bohr’s ( 1958 ) comple ment ar ity 
and inde term in acy rela tions – the quantum 
theor et ical preced ents for Barad’s dynam ics 
of matter ing – are such that they provide 
inform a tion not about what causes produce 
what eﬀ ects, but about what observ able 
values and corres pond ing states of exist-
ence can come into being simul tan eously. 
As I have noted else where, ‘Th eoretically . . . 
inde term in acy rela tions should thus tell us 
how mind and matter can or cannot coexist 
within diﬀ er ent events, given a suﬃ   ciently 
detailed account of the appar atus/exper i-
mental arrange ments in ques tion’ ( Jones 
2014 : 193). Th e dynam ics of matter ing 
tell us what mean ings and states of matter 
can simul tan eously co- exist and which 
cannot within speciﬁ ed mater ial- discurs ive 
contexts. 
 Th e combin a tion of the cultural studies 
vocab u lary of perform ativ ity with the 
vocab u lary of quantum physics in this 
account of matter ing should provide a 
rough sense of the term’s complex 
disciplin ary history. We certainly cannot 
mention perform ativ ity without evoking 
high light how the term’s rhizo matic ances-
try is a test a ment to the non- separ ab il ity of 
dynam ics and ethics. 
 Mattering is a kind of posthu man ist 
perform ativ ity that emphas izes matter’s 
capa city to matter, to achieve signi ﬁ c ance 
in its being  as doing. Matter here is not 
ground or essence, but agen t ive, ‘produced 
and product ive, gener ated and gener at ive’ 
( Barad 2007 : 137). To attend to matter in 
this way is posthu man ist because agency, 
histor icity and inten tion al ity – the keys to 
meaning- making – are under stood not as 
attrib utes of human culture and subjectiv-
ity, but as transcor por eal enact ments that 
extend across and through human and 
nonhu man bodies ( Alaimo 2010 ). And it is 
perform at ive because it suggests that 
discrete entit ies and the mean ings attached 
to them emerge within, rather than 
precede, the rela tions that consti tute them. 
When we pose the ques tion of what 
matters and how, we are not dealing with 
pre- exist ing bodies upon which language 
inscribes meaning, but with rela tions of 
doing, acting and becom ing that exist in 
mater ial- discurs ive super pos i tion until an 
agen tial cut inter venes to demarc ate clear 
bound ar ies between words and things. 
And this agen tial cut, or bound ary- making 
prac tice, is a part of the very phenomenon 
it speciﬁ es, rather than apart from it. 
 Performativity is thus the dynamic core 
of matter ing. ‘To specify or study the 
dynam ics of a system’, Barad tells us, ‘is to 
say some thing about the nature of and 
possib il it ies for change’ (2007: 179). 
Normally, in the natural sciences, study ing 
dynam ics means observing how the vari-
ables that describe the state of a system 
change over time. But this under stand ing 
of the nature of change is rendered incom-
pre hens ible under the rubric of matter ing’s 
perform at ive dynam ics. Indeed, if the 
prop er ties of a system are not determ in ate 
outside of the system’s rela tion with other