PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEURONAL AESTHETICS

2004) linked to memor ies, feel ings, attach-
ments, monet ary value, polit ics, profes-
sions and ﬂ eet ing titil la tions. Explorations 
of networked aﬀ ect as the fuel for action 
help in mapping out how online plat forms, 
exchanges and devices matter, as well as 
that which they aﬀ ect – the purposes they 
are harnessed to and the outcomes that 
they facil it ate. Here, any clear binary 
divides between the rational and the aﬀ ect-
ive, the human and the non- human or the 
user and the instru ment used are guar an-
teed to break down. 
 See also Aﬀ ective Turn; Algorithm; Body 
Without Organs; Post Internet; Non-
Human Agency; Political Aﬀ ect. 
 Susanna Paasonen 
 NEURONAL AESTHETICS  
 At the begin ning of the twen ti eth century 
Santiago Ramón y Cajal’s Nobel Prize- 
winning discov ery of the struc ture of 
neurons as separ ate cells which commu nic-
ate via synaptic connec tions counts as one 
of the found ing moments in neur os cience 
( Ramón y Cajal 1906 ); the 1950s discov ery 
of the  DNA  and molecu lar biology was 
a second step in the estab lish ment of 
modern neur os cience ( Shepherd 2010 ), but 
in the posthu man era know ledge about 
and conscious ness of the brain has taken 
on an entirely new dimen sion. As Rose and 
Abi-Rached have demon strated in their 
book  Neuro , a ‘neur omolec u lar style of 
thought’ has modi ﬁ ed many basic and 
beha vi oural sciences by the preﬁ x ‘neuro-’ 
in 
neuro chem istry, 
neuro path o logy, 
neurophysiology, neuro bi o logy, neuro psy-
cho logy, etc. (2013: 41–3). 
 Jean-Pierre 
Changeux’s 
book 
 Th e 
Neuronal Man , published in France in 
1983, contrib uted in import ant ways to 
bring ing scientiﬁ c know ledge about the 
brain to a larger and more popular audi-
ence. Neuroscientiﬁ c know ledge left  the 
lab and has trav elled into the world and 
into the domain of aesthet ics, a ﬁ eld with 
strong human ist roots. ‘Neuroaesthetics’ 
is not uncon tested but should never the-
less be connec ted to the posthu man. A 
neur onal approach of aesthet ics enfolds a 
double danger of alien a tion. In the ﬁ rst 
place there is a risk of too rigor ous a reduc-
tion ism of aesthetic exper i ence to bundles 
of axons and dend rites, and of forget ting 
an entire human it ies tradi tion of soph ist-
ic ated reﬂ ec tion on aesthet ics (and other 
branches of philo sophy). As Oliver Sacks 
acknow ledges in  Musicophilia , ‘Th ere is 
now an enorm ous and rapidly growing 
body of work on the neur onal under pin-
nings of musical percep tion and imagery 
. . . but there is always a certain danger that 
the simple art of obser va tion may be lost, 
that clin ical descrip tion may become 
perfunc tory. And the rich ness of the 
human context ignored’ (2007: xiii–xiv) 
Moreover, the neur o turn cannot be 
uncoupled from the digital turn, which has 
exten ded the idea of human know ledge 
and exper i ence in signi ﬁ c ant ways beyond 
the borders of the autonom ous subject 
into a networked man- machine sphere. 
Neuronal aesthet ics there fore symp to mat-
ic ally carries the double dangers of, on the 
one hand, reduc tion ism of the human 
exper i ence to the micro bi o logy of our 
neurons, and on the other hand the dissol-
u tion of human agency into compu tated 
networks. But there are also oppor tun it-
ies for multi- layered and networked 
approaches to aesthet ics and exper i ence 
that may oﬀ er insights into import ant 
aspects of the posthu man condi tion as 
embod ied, exten ded and networked forms 
of agency. 
 Th e term ‘neuroaes thet ics’ is of fairly 
recent date and was coined by Samir Zeki