PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
LEAKS AND STINGS

Leaks and stings oﬀ er us a way of rethinking 
circu la tion in a posthu man condi tion. 
Leaks emanate from both mater ial and 
inform a tion 
infra struc tures, 
bypassing 
‘normal’ or author ized chan nels of circu la-
tion. Media leaks refer to unanti cip ated or 
delib er ate disclos ures of priv ileged inform-
a tion by a range of actors: rivals, activ ists 
claim ing public interest, transna tional 
groups commit ted to trans par ency, network 
manip u la tion. Data leaks may emerge from 
soft  ware plat forms, either by ‘malfunc tion’ 
or through hacker attacks. ‘Th e leak’, say 
Mathew Fuller and Andrew Goﬀ ey, ‘is 
the emis sion liber ated from its proper place 
by an act of omis sion, or neglect of right 
contain ment’ (2012: 100). 
 Stings used be a priv ilege of the state, 
where police gathered evid ence to record 
but actu ally not provoke crim inal acts. In 
paral lel police entrap ment records staged 
encoun ters with hidden media devices, 
whereby the target is induced to commit an 
incrim in at ing act. In the contem por ary 
media land scape, this police tech no logy 
has been deployed by activ ists, journ al ists 
and private indi vidu als, who use hidden 
media devices to entrap indi vidu als or hack 
into mobile phones of celebrit ies as in the 
recent cases in the  UK . Th e ‘private’ media 
sting signi ﬁ c antly trans formed the older 
police tech no logy: it initi ated new ﬁ elds of 
circu la tion, and opened larger ques tions 
of the public interest and sover eignty, as 
systems of secrecy, censor ship and control 
face new chal lenges. As tech niques of 
disrupt ing author ized circu la tion both 
leaks and stings oﬀ er us ways of think ing 
about infra struc ture and circu la tion. 
 As phys ical forms that govern the 
engines of circu la tion, infra struc tures typic-
ally bring together popu la tions, commod it-
ies, money and prac tices of making and 
unmak ing. Infrastructures, says the anthro-
po lo gist Brian Larkin, ‘shape the nature of a 
network, the speed and direc tion of its 
move ment, its tempor al it ies, and its vulner-
ab il ity to break down’ (2013: 328) Igor 
Kopytoﬀ  ( 1986 ) has spoken of the many 
‘lives’ of commod it ies as they move in and 
out of circu la tion. Media objects like audio 
and video also take on multiple lives as they 
move in diverse time–space conﬁ g ur a tions. 
In events linked to stings and leaks, a 
premium is placed on the moment of live- 
ness: the burst of aﬀ ect ive energy when the 
inform a tion is released in the public domain, 
designed to multiply the polit ical eﬀ ects of 
the act. Th is is oft en not the end of the story, 
as media moves to other envir on ments and 
plat forms. Leaks and stings are part of a 
gener at ive move ment, where prac tices, 
objects and people attach them selves to 
chan ging assemblages. Th is assemblage is a 
dynamic media ecology, which is not a stable 
arrange ment of tech no lo gies and envir on-
ments, but rather is product ive, result ing in 
new inter ven tions or ‘space- times’ ( Deleuze 
1990 : 176). Once the initial event has taken 
place we see a constant redis tri bu tion of 
forces and new plat forms and spaces emerge: 
polit ical scandal, activ ist mobil iz a tion or a 
judi cial event like a court case. 
 Th is ‘loop’ shapes much of contem por-
ary media circu la tion, wherein media 
objects move in and out of infra struc tures, 
attach them selves to new plat forms of 
polit ical- aesthetic action, and are drawn to 
or depart from the spec tac u lar time of 
media events. Th is drive marks the turbu-
lent, dynamic ecology of stings/leaks, with 
chan ging combin a tions of prot ag on ists, 
tech no lo gies and spaces: tele vi sion news-
rooms, online plat forms, police stations, 
govern ment 
oﬃ  ces, 
courts, 
enquiry 
commis sions, demon stra tions and activ ist 
forums. 
 Michael Warner ( 2002 ) points to the 
‘fruit ful perversity’ of all acts of modern 
publi city. Once initi ated, these acts