PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
LAMPEDUSA

abjec tion where the ‘human’ is continu-
ously tested, worked upon and reframed. 
Death is oft en anonym ous at the border, 
partic u larly but not only in mari time 
border scapes. Even when names are 
assigned to bodies, the prevail ing image is 
one of an indis tinct mass of corpses, well 
beyond the threshold of indi vidu al ity. Th e 
aware ness of this under lies one of the most 
power ful works produced on Lampedusa, 
the short ﬁ lm  Asmat – Nomi  by Dagmawi 
Yimer ( 2014 ), where the victims of the 
ship wreck of 3 October 2013 are 
mentioned by their names, one by one. 
 Border and mobil ity control have 
become priv ileged sites for human it arian 
inter ven tion, be it for estab lished inter-
national insti tu tions like  UNHCR or 
 NGO s and other hetero gen eous actors. 
Th e inter twin ing of human it arian logics 
with concerns regard ing ‘secur ity’ and 
economic valor iz a tion of the ‘human 
capital’ of people on the move is a deﬁ n ing 
char ac ter istic of many emer ging border 
and migra tion regimes. In this assemblage 
of govern mental ration al it ies, which is 
not adequately grasped by a focus on 
‘excep tion’, national states continue to be 
import ant actors while being continu ously 
compelled to nego ti ate their sover eign 
power with inter na tional legal orders and 
global players like the International 
Organization for Migration. ‘Biopolitics’ 
(under stood as an attempt to stop, select-
ively ﬁ lter and channel people on the 
move) appears here as struc tur ally artic-
ulated with the ‘necro pol it ics’ of ship-
wrecks, drown ing and asphyxi ation in 
trucks. Gender, class and race, ‘skills’, 
culture and reli gion are continu ously at 
stake in this artic u la tion of biopol it ics and 
necro pol it ics, which crosses the ﬁ gure of 
the human, produ cing new hier arch ies and 
new bound ar ies within it. 
 Borderzones like the one surround ing 
Lampedusa set the condi tions for the 
oper a tions of multi far i ous actors, who take 
the illeg al iz a tion of border cross ing as a 
chance for busi ness. ‘Traﬃ  ckers’ and ‘smug-
glers’ are oft en presen ted as respons ible for 
the inhuman treat ment of migrants and 
refugees as well as for their death. Images 
of ‘slave trade’ and ‘inden ture’ are invoked 
with regard to their oper a tions. What is 
usually not mentioned is that the spaces 
and condi tions in which these actors 
operate are not created by them but by 
polit ical decisions and the working of 
speciﬁ c border and migra tion regi mens. 
And, equally import antly, the paral lel with 
the trans port of bonded labour erases a 
crucial diﬀ er ence – that is, the fact that 
migrants and refugees, in most cases,  want 
to cross borders and are not compelled to 
do so. While there is a persist ent reality of 
‘forced migra tion’ which deserves crit ical 
invest ig a tion, this is true for instance for 
people cross ing the Mediterranean Sea, as 
appar ent in the so- called ‘migra tion crisis’ 
of summer 2015. 
 Besides being spaces of control and 
selec tion, viol ence, death and abjec tion, 
borderzones are also sites of resist ance 
where a kind of element ary search for 
freedom clashes with a control machine 
predic ated upon the imper at ives of secur-
ity, economic valor iz a tion and human-
itarian manage ment of mobil ity. Th e 
geography of border control is oft en chal-
lenged and tested by the power and dynam-
ics of mass migra tion. In the European 
‘crisis’ of the summer of 2015, the relev ance 
of Lampedusa within this geography was 
itself chal lenged and displaced by the 
opening up of new migrat ory routes (most 
notably through the Greek islands and the 
‘Western Balkans’). We have been confron-
ted with a multi plic a tion of sites, which 
rapidly became iconic for the conﬂ icts and 
tensions related with migra tion – from the