PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MULTISPECIES

and endanger the entire planet, others are 
turning to the  topos  of territ ory, soil and 
city. Multispecies ethno graph ers and 
artists are follow ing Donna Haraway, 
who insists: I am a creature of the mud, not 
the sky. Agitating against Anthropocene 
discourse, multis pe cies studies involves 
writing and making culture in a mode that 
is less anthro po centric than prevail ing 
trends. In blasted land scapes that have 
been trans formed by multiple cata-
strophes, ethno graph ers and artists are 
illu min at ing modest sites of biocul tural 
hope. 
 Timothy Ingold has recently sugges ted 
that we abandon the multis pe cies idiom 
since the notion of  species itself is a human 
construct. ‘Only in the purview of a univer-
sal human ity’, he main tains, ‘does the world 
of living things appear as a cata logue of 
biod iversity, as a plur al ity of species’ (2000: 
217). Paying clear atten tion to the ebb and 
ﬂ ow of agency in multis pe cies worlds 
reveals that humans are not alone in our 
prac tices that group kinds of life on the 
basis of simil ar ity and divide others on the 
basis of diﬀ er ence. Diverse organ isms 
engage in processes of recog ni tion, diﬀ er-
en ti ation, and clas si ﬁ c a tion – bring ing 
them selves and others into being as 
‘species’. In other words, species emerge as 
entangled agents  become with one another 
in common worlds. As beings redis cover 
each other in intergen er a tional dances, 
species persist across time and space. 
Species also some times  become beside 
them selves, to para phrase Brian Rotman 
( 2008 ), they are inter mit tently present to 
them selves, becom ing multiple and paral-
lel, with glee and dissol u tion. 
 Species involve a multi tude. Emerging 
ﬁ nd ings about micro bial compan ion species 
give a new twist to Annemarie Mol’s 
sugges tion that bodies are ‘an intric ately 
coordin ated crowd’ (2002: viii). If species 
some times appear to be in isol a tion, perhaps 
 MULTISPECIES  
 Rather than simply celeb rate the fact of 
multis pe cies ming ling, it is better to begin 
with the ques tion:  cui bono (who bene ﬁ ts) 
when species meet? Creatures once 
conﬁ ned to the realm of  zoe , or bare life 
which is killable – have started to appear 
along side humans in the domain of  bios , 
with legible biograph ical and polit ical lives 
in the social sciences and the envir on-
mental human it ies. Rather than make other 
kinds of crit ters count only as conscious 
agents, 
networked 
actors, 
inten tional 
commu nic at ors or ethical subjects, the ﬁ eld 
of multis pe cies studies assumes that other 
organ isms do not have to show their human 
equi val ence. Th e notion of the ‘non- human’ 
is like ‘non- white’ – imply ing the lack of 
some thing. 
 Departing from ‘the ques tion of the 
animal,’ the polemic by Jacques Derrida 
arguing that ‘the human–animal distinc-
tion can no longer and ought no longer be 
main tained’, the ﬁ eld of multis pe cies 
studies also engages with ‘the ques tion of 
the fungus’ and ‘the ques tion of the plant’ 
( Derrida 2008 ). Fungi illus trate ‘prac tices 
that thrive in the “gap” between what is 
taken as wild and what is taken as domest-
ic ated,’ accord ing to the Matsutake Worlds 
Research Group ( 2009 ). ‘Th inking like a 
fungus’ opens up ques tions like: ‘Who is 
doing the domest ic at ing? And to what 
end?’  Plant-Th inking , the recent book by 
Michael Marder, regards plants as ‘collect-
ive beings,’ as ‘non- total iz ing assemblages 
of multi pli cit ies, inher ently polit ical spaces 
of convi vi al ity’ (2013). 
 Multispecies studies involves prac tising 
the art of noti cing; it involves passion ate 
immer sion in the lives of others. In an era 
when many posthu man thinkers have 
turned their atten tion to global climate 
change, an era when the agency and action 
of  anthro pos has been scaled up to embrace