PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INVARIANCE

object’s ‘strange ness’. 5 One confuses invari-
ance with iden tity whenever one reads 
Monod’s use of ‘strange’ in his discus sion of 
‘strange objects’ as an adject ive. Serres 
elab or ates: ‘strange does not qualify a 
substant ive’, rather ‘strange’ oper ates as a 
quan ti ﬁ er, not as a qual i ﬁ er. Th e molecu lar 
theory of the genetic code is ‘a phys ical 
theory of herit age’ that comple ments the 
Darwinian evol u tion ary view. A phys ical 
theory of inher it ance is a basis that quan ti-
ﬁ es substant ives in terms of diﬀ er ent 
niveaus of negen tropy (as amounts of 
chance, that can be deciphered from the 
mutu ally implic at ive rela tion between 
invari ant and teleo nomic inform a tion). 
With his notion of the  strange object , 
Monod suggests a notion of the object that 
neither contra dicts the prin ciples of 
physics (second law of ther mo dy nam ics, 
one univer sal ity) nor those of Darwinian 
biology (natural selec tion in evol u tion, 
plur al ist univer sal ity of natural kinds). 
Hence onto gen etic and phylo gen etic life 
are both compat ible with ther mo dy nam-
ics. But the central assump tion thereby is 
that invari ance genet ic ally, chem ic ally and 
phys ic ally 
precedes 
tele onomy: 
‘the 
 Genomenon is the secret code of the 
 Phaenomenon ’, as Serres puts it (1992: 59). 
Th e ‘strange object’ is one which neither 
presup poses a distinc tion between natural 
and arti ﬁ  cial, things endowed with a 
purpose (project) and things natural 
(without purpose), nor one between 
animate and inert. It is crucial for under-
stand ing Monod’s primacy of code to 
emphas ize that what is all- too-oft en short- 
circuited as ‘the code of life’, to Monod is a 
rela tion between code and its secret (life) 
that is one of mutual  inde pend ence , one 
regard ing the phenomenon of life (not life 
itself) and one entirely chance- bound in 
the substan tial deﬁ n i tion of the term: 
 between the occur rences that can provoke 
or permit an error in the  replic a tion of the 
genetic message and its func tional 
consequences there is also a complete 
inde pend ence. Th e func tional eﬀ ect 
depends upon the struc ture, upon the 
actual role of the modi ﬁ ed protein, 
upon the inter ac tions it ensures, upon the 
reac tions it cata lyzes – all things which 
have nothing to do with the muta tional 
event itself nor with its imme di ate or 
remote causes, regard less of the nature, 
whether determ in istic or not, of those 
causes. 
 Monod 1972 : 114 
 In order to illus trate this postu lated inde-
pend ence between the code itself and its 
artic u lated mani fest a tions, Monod discusses 
the coin cid ence of genu inely hetero gen ous 
sequences via the example of a worker ﬁ xing 
a roof, letting go of his tool acci dent ally, and 
a passer- by who is in no way related to the 
worker on the roof but who is hit by the 
falling tool and killed thereby. If one were to 
assume that there be a larger logics that 
homo gen izes these two hetero gen ous series, 
one would indeed have to assume that the 
passer- by was fate fully predic ated to die like 
this from the very begin ning of his exist-
ence; against the assump tion of such fatal-
ism, Monod stresses his two deﬁ n i tions of 
chance as (1) oper able and (2) substan tial. 
While the genetic text itself is a closed and 
ﬁ nite system (with its resid ual alpha bet of 
amino acids and nucle otides), the source of 
the biosphere’s incred ible variety results 
from errors in the tran scrip tion of the code’s 
sequences. For this tran scrip tion process it is 
crucial that one always has to consider  pairs 
of nucle otides (liter ally  that which is with a 
nucleus ); one cannot do with singu lar ized 
and original ones. Th ese pairs – and this is 
the essen tial role invari ant amounts of 
inform a tion need to play, coun ter bal an cing 
the struc tural tele onomy of bound inform a-
tion – must be deciphered in a double sense.