PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PRECOGNITION

2011 ). What precog ni tion demands of the 
body is an a- tempor al ity, a quantum exist-
ence within two simul tan eous points in 
time. Th is distrib uted body at once seems 
separ ated from nature into the removed 
depths of cogni tion, situ at ing the body 
simul tan eously within the real and the 
abstract. Th e one is a posi tion ing, an empir-
ical ﬁ eld of vision, in contrast to the latter 
which resides in excess of cogni tion – 
similar to  XXXXX ’s reading of Descartes’ 
search for scientiﬁ c consist ency and his 
confront a tion with the inab il ity to distin-
guish dreams from reality, leaving much to 
cling onto in terms of the excess of substance 
or the resid uals of subject ive exper i ence of 
conscious ness ( XXXXX  2006 ). 
 Following 
Descartes, 
the 
tension 
between these modes of exist ence and how 
we consider their rela tion with the future, 
past and present depends on the formu la-
tion of the problem of the real: if future 
feeling can be tested or replic ated then it 
consti tutes the real; and if the exper i ence 
alludes scientiﬁ c measure then it resides in 
the incon sequen tial. Within this frame-
work the future becomes some thing 
empir ic ally commanded or grasped. How-
ever, what remains is what Ryan Bishop 
( 2011 ) terms a ‘confu sion of the sensorium’, 
or the point at which the disor i ent a tion 
of Cartesian distinc tion between science 
and nature, mind and matter and so on 
converges into a strata of indis tin guish able 
and incom pre hens ible rela tions that super-
sede the gener al iz a tion of the real. 
 Nonetheless, Brian Massumi ( 2002 ) has 
fruit fully illus trated that the conven tional 
meaning or the content of any inter sub-
ject ive context is never neatly placed by the 
quality or intens ity of that exper i ence. 
Th ere is no cohe sion or consist ency 
between the two, and if there is, as Massumi 
writes, ‘it is of another nature.’ Contrary to 
empir ical assess ments which require an 
orient a tion that is quan ti ﬁ  able as real, it 
some cases the spir itual, is diﬃ   cult to deny 
( Kennedy 2005 ). However, it would do us 
well to consider that the abstrac tions of 
our vast non- linear world are arte facts of 
discov ery and inter pret a tion in as much as 
they are not bound by phys ical laws, 
language, concept or limit. Instead, discov-
ery is gener al ized as a type of trans fer of 
sensa tion in the reorder ing of reality, not 
as valid a tion of pre- consti tuted forms of 
exist ence. Precognition is the evap or a tion 
of past, present and future into new work-
able modes of under stand ing though the 
unknown. 
 More so, Daryl Bem ( 2011 ) argues that 
fore know ledge does not just note the 
process of reason, but is an anom al ous 
process of inform a tion or energy trans fer 
that is unex plained in terms of known 
phys ical or biolo gical mech an isms. For 
this reason evid en tiary modes of know-
ledge produc tion should be exten ded into 
realms that are not  a priori under stood, but 
medi ated through embod ied exper i ence. 
As Bem states, anti cip a tion of future event, 
or knowing the unknow able, ‘would be 
evol u tion ar ily advant age ous for repro duc-
tion and survival if the organ ism could act 
instru ment ally to approach erotic stimuli 
and avoid negat ive stimuli’ (2011: 6). Yet, 
despite the stat ist ic ally signi ﬁ c ant produc-
tion of Bem’s correl a tions, empir ical theor-
ies of the precog nit ive do not extend far 
enough in terms of describ ing the embod-
ied exper i ence of abstrac tion. 
 In this way, precog ni tion is not merely a 
sensa tion at the level of the mental in terms 
of human thought but resembles a synaes-
thesia against commonly held divi sions 
between human mind and body or body 
and non- human extern al ity ( Bishop 2011 ). 
What remains is an exper i ment a tion in the 
senses, and in the way we relate to how we 
see the world through spatio- temporal 
sens it iv it ies. Aft er all, believ ing in the world 
is ulti mately believ ing in the body ( Hughes