PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMANISM

the onto lo gical hier archy just outlined. It is 
posthu man ist, that is to say, in its oppos i-
tion to anthro po centrism and to the 
assump tion that the subject worthy of 
ethical recog ni tion, in any way coin cides, 
 prima facie , with the taxo nomic desig na-
tion ‘human’. But it is human ist, and in a 
debil it at ing way, in  how it mounts this 
argu ment philo soph ic ally. Whether in 
Regan’s neo-Kantian version or Singer’s 
util it arian version, what secures ethical 
stand ing for the animal is a set of char ac-
ter ist ics, qual it ies and poten ti al it ies that 
ends up looking an awful lot like  us. And 
so animals are accor ded stand ing because 
they embody, in dimin ished form, some 
norm at ive concept of the ‘human’. And that 
would seem to be at odds with the ethical 
commit ment that got the whole enter prise 
of animal rights philo sophy up and 
running in the ﬁ rst place – namely, the 
desire to recog nize the ethical value of 
diﬀ er ent, non- human ways of being in the 
world. 
 What all of this means is that the nature 
of thought itself, and not just the  object of 
thought, must change if it is to be posthu-
man ist. More precisely, the ‘human’ can no 
longer be considered either the origin or the 
end of thought, and in at least two senses. 
First, the ‘human’ is not an  explanans but an 
 explanan dum , not an explan a tion but that 
which needs to be explained. To put it 
another way, the most philo soph ic ally 
complex and prag mat ic ally robust accounts 
of what consti tutes the speciﬁ city of this 
thing we call ‘human’ are accounts in which 
the idea of the ‘human’ as we’ve inher ited it 
from the Western philo soph ical tradi tion 
actu ally does no heavy lift ing. For example, 
many people would argue that part of what 
makes humans ‘human’ is a unique rela tion-
ship between language and cogni tion. But 
to really under stand what is going on in that 
rela tion ship – to really explore the rela tion-
ship 
between 
the 
neuro physiolo gical 
that the full achieve ment of that thing we 
call ‘human’ must be predic ated upon over-
com ing and ﬁ nally tran scend ing not just 
our ‘animal’ origins (in the name of a 
rational manip u la tion and optim iz a tion of 
the human condi tion) but also the fetters 
of mater i al ity and embod i ment alto-
gether. Th e clearest symptom of this very 
old human ist philo soph ical desire is 
transhuman ism’s predic tion that we will, 
someday soon, be able to over come all 
diseases and inﬁ rm it ies, even tu ally achiev-
ing radic ally exten ded lifespans, and even 
immor tal ity. Leaving aside the prac tical 
and prag matic ques tions that accom pany 
this claim, I merely wish to point out that 
the achieve ment of the fully ‘human’ condi-
tion by the killing oﬀ , tran scend ence, 
repres sion or over com ing of the ‘animal’ 
body is a very old and very famil iar hall-
mark of human ism – and, histor ic ally 
speak ing, a very danger ous one, as recent 
work in biopol it ical thought by Michel 
Foucault, Judith Butler, Jacques Derrida, 
Donna Haraway, Giorgio Agamben and 
others has made clear. Th e intro duc tion of 
such an onto lo gical hier archy between the 
‘human’ and the ‘animal’ (and the anim al ity 
 of the human) has been, as these thinkers 
remind us, one of the key discurs ive tech-
no lo gies for render ing not just animal 
popu la tions, but various  human popu la-
tions, ‘killable but not murder able’. 
 A second reason that this ‘human ist 
posthu man ism’ is prob lem atic is that even 
when it does not indulge in such famil iar 
strategies – indeed, even when it opposes 
them – the human ist mode of thought in 
which such oppos i tion is mounted under-
cuts what may be quite admir able ethical, 
polit ical or other impulses that we share 
with human ism. For example, animal 
rights philo sophy as artic u lated by its two 
most import ant found ing philo soph ers – 
Tom Regan and Peter Singer – is certainly 
posthu man ist in the sense that it opposes