PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
LITERATURE OF LIBERATION

animals and lands ( Huggan and Tiﬃ  n 
2010 ;  DeLoughrey and Handley 2011 ). 
 It is clear that the only way to grant 
inde pend ence to oppressed people and 
beings – the only way to liber ate them – is 
to give them a voice, and to  see their stories. 
But there is another, even more onto lo gic-
ally radical form of liber a tion. Th is is the 
liber a tion of  things  from their silence, the 
consid er a tion of non- humans as ‘full- 
ﬂ edged actors’ ( Latour 1999 : 174) in a 
‘polit ical ecology’ which involves all mater-
ial beings, and which has been artic u lated 
by authors such as Bruno Latour, Jane 
Bennett, Karen Barad, Bill Brown, Ian 
Bogost, 
William 
Connolly, 
Roberto 
Esposito and Philippe Descola. Liberating 
things from their silence is not merely 
an exer cise of human creativ ity, but an 
essen tial act of ecolo gical imagin a tion. 
Resonating with this discourse, liter ary 
imagin a tion can be a way to over come the 
bound ar ies of subjectiv ity, and to eman-
cip ate storytelling from the stand point of 
the indi vidual ego. Th is idea is eﬀ ect ively 
expressed by Italo Calvino in the ﬁ nal lines 
of his  Six Memos for the Next Millennium : 
 Th ink what it would be to have a work 
conceived from outside the  self , a work 
that would let us escape the limited 
perspect ive of the indi vidual ego, not only 
to enter into selves like our own, but to 
give speech to that which has no language, 
to the bird perch ing on the edge of the 
gutter, to the tree in spring and the tree in 
the fall, to stone, to cement, to plastic . . . 
Was this not perhaps what Ovid was 
aiming at, when he wrote about the 
continu ity of forms? And what Lucretius 
was aiming at when he iden ti ﬁ ed himself 
with that nature common to each and 
every thing? 
 2009 [1988]: 124 
 Like Calvino, authors and thinkers such as 
Ovid, Lucretius, Spinoza, Darwin, Goethe, 
Blake, Mary Wollstonecraft , Kafk a, Jorge 
Luis Borges and many others demon strate 
how the human is not the apical element of 
an ordered creation, but rather an expres-
sion of the world’s morpho lo gical irony. In 
their own ﬁ elds and styles, they provide 
creat ive tools that liber ate us from the 
obses sions of anthro po centrism, pulling 
the human back into the wider horizon of 
being. More in general, the authors and 
genres enter ing this lineage of imagin a tion 
– from Lucretius to Philip K. Dick and 
Margaret Atwood, from magical realism to 
science ﬁ ction, from toxic auto bi o graph ies 
to cli- ﬁ  – have some thing in common: they 
help readers (and critics) to build narra-
t ives about the world that are thera peutic 
against the isol a tion of the human self. In 
this dimen sion of inter sect ing players and 
pres ences, recog niz ing ‘imper sonal stories’ 
– stories of land, of things, of hybrid ity, of 
processes – is in fact as import ant for a 
healthy rela tion ship to our world as recog-
niz ing personal stories, stories of people. 
Th ese imper sonal stories embody and 
express many of the dynam ics that inﬂ u-
ence our life: like the trans- corpor eal 
exchanges of substances and the trans- 
local ity of envir on mental processes show, 
now more than ever,  the imper sonal is 
polit ical . Th is is even truer if we consider 
that, as posthu man ist thinkers insist, the 
imper sonal agency of a vast array of ‘others’ 
is also crucial to our very exist ence. In a 
profound sense, mater i ally as well as 
discurs ively, it is the non- human that 
makes us human ( Haraway 2008 ;  Braidotti 
2013 ;  Marchesini 2002 ). 
 By creat ing new vocab u lar ies apt to 
show, inter pret and repres ent the world in 
its multi pli city of players and stories, litera-
t ure has a power to act as a priv ileged means 
of liber a tion and of eman cip a tion for both 
the human and for its ‘other’, espe cially if 
considered in the frame work of a an 
ecology of culture ( Zapf 2016 ). Th e emer-
gence of these cultural tools is decis ive,