PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
WAR

situ ation’ (ibid.: 5). So, for war to break out, 
a second and third stage, named ‘confront-
a tion’ and ‘legit im a tion’ are neces sary. 
‘Confrontation’ relates to the parties 
involved coming to look upon the ‘contra-
dic tion’ as somehow relev ant, creat ing an 
antag on istic rela tion ship. During the third 
stage (‘legit im a tion’) viol ence is oﬃ   cially 
sanc tioned as the legit im ate course of 
action through the imagin ing of violent 
scen arios, what Schröder and Schmidt call 
‘violent imagin ar ies’. Finally, during ‘war’ 
viol ence is put into prac tice. 
 War oft en provides an enabling envir-
on ment for the accu mu la tion of wealth, 
social organ iz a tion and insti tu tional and 
tech no lo gical change. Contrary to propa-
gand istic portray als of war as a (sports) 
game or collapse, wars are not neces sar ily 
about winning, or implo sion and disorder. 
Rather, war is an altern at ive system of 
proﬁ t, power and protec tion. As famously 
argued in rela tion to the Second World 
War by Randolph Bourne, ‘war’ and ‘the 
state’ are deeply linked, and in a sense 
inter de pend ent: ‘War is the health of the 
State’, and the ulti mate act of state hood. 
‘States are deeply war machines, and the 
peace they make is the peace of  paci ﬁ c a-
tion ,’ says the Retort collect ive ( Boal et al. 
2005 : 94). In return, what we call ‘peace’ is 
oft en sustained by highly destruct ive forms 
of struc tural viol ence ( Galtung 1996 ;  Žižek 
2008 ;  Demmers 2017 ). 
 Over the past decades, remote ness in 
all its modal it ies (e.g. as distan cing or 
 WAR  
 War is a time at which viol ence is legit im-
ized, 
insti tu tion al ized 
and 
deployed 
against a construc ted enemy. Apart from 
being horriﬁ c and atro cious, war is 
normal ity. It repeats and repro duces itself 
through imagin ar ies which render it 
accept able and neces sary, and through 
insti tu tional forms which serve as war- 
making machinery. For Jabri, ‘War and 
violent conﬂ ict are social phenom ena 
emer ging through, and constitutive of, 
social prac tices which have, through time 
and across space, rendered war an insti tu-
tional form that is largely seen as an inev it-
able and at times accept able form of 
human conduct’ (1996: 4). For war to start, 
it ﬁ rst has to become imagin able. A crucial 
stage in the run- up to war is its dress 
rehearsal in the form of ‘million repe ti-
tions’ of ‘single words, idioms and sentence 
struc tures’ imposed on people ( Klemperer 
1947 [2000] ). Anthropologists Schröder 
and Schmidt argue that ‘viol ence needs to 
be imagined in order to be carried out’ 
(2001: 9). In describ ing the proces sual 
char ac ter ist ics of violent action they 
propose a four- stage model leading from 
‘conﬂ ict’ to ‘war’. Th e ﬁ rst stage, ‘conﬂ ict’, is 
seen as the socio- economic contra dic tion 
at the base of inter- party compet i tion. 
However, organ ized viol ence (‘war’) does 
not auto mat ic ally result from contra dic-
tion. ‘Wars are made by those indi vidu als, 
groups or classes that have the power 
success fully to repres ent viol ence as the 
 W