PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
HYPERSOCIAL

and gesture towards the crit ical posthu-
man it ies. To start with, the hyper so cial 
provokes us to produce new forms of crit-
ical know ledge which defy neo- posit iv ist 
and shallow forms of social analysis and 
quan ti ﬁ c a tion without return ing to the 
modern, human ist social of clas sical soci-
ology ( Braidotti 2013 ). Such crit ical know-
ledges might include: crit ical gene a lo gies 
of social soft  ware as biopol it ical dispos i tifs 
of power/know ledge and in general new 
approaches to the study of auto ma tion, 
compu ta tion and algorithms ( Rieder 
2012b ;  Kaldrack and Röhle 2014 ;  Parisi 
2013b ); non- anthro po centric philo sophies 
of the social or ‘cosmic soci olo gies’ 
which see matter and life (organic and 
nonor ganic) as consti tuted by aﬀ ect ive 
energy- ﬂ ows and forces of asso ci ation/
disso ci ation ( Tarde 2012 ); aﬃ  rm at ive 
critiques and trans ﬁ g ur a tions of polit ical 
economy and neo- clas sical econom ics 
which formu late new theor ies of labour 
and value/s ( Lazzarato 2002 ;  Latour and 
Lépinay 2009 ); aﬃ  rm at ive contest a tions of 
the polit ics of Big Data ( Blackman 2015 ); 
and carto graph ies which specify the new 
nature of processes of subjectiv a tion 
(includ ing racial iz a tion and sexu al iz a tion) 
in social network onto lo gies ( Nakamura 
and Chow-White 2011 ;  Sharma 2013 ; 
 Terranova 2016 ). 
 See 
also 
Networked 
Aﬀ ect; 
Youth; 
Algorithm; Computational Turn. 
 Tiziana Terranova
Empire and control, which subsumes iden-
tity and diﬀ er ence into its logic of 
governance. As such, we bear witness to the 
contin ued erasure of embod i ment and the 
cotermin ous prolif er a tion of what Critical 
Art Ensemble labels the ‘data body’ ( Critical 
Art Ensemble 1998 ). Donna Haraway once 
artic u lated this prob lem atic as ‘the inform-
at ics of domin a tion’, the coming commu-
nic a tions networks of control that trans late 
‘the world into a problem of coding’ 
( Haraway 1991 : 161, 164); a biomet ric 
template to police national borders, an 
instant credit check to determ ine economic 
viab il ity, a gene to determ ine sexual orient-
a tion. Amongst teeming transna tional ﬂ ows 
of inform a tion, Haraway is careful to 
remind us that ‘People are nowhere near so 
ﬂ uid, being both mater ial and opaque’ (ibid.: 
153). Th is erad ic a tion of opaque excess by 
inform atic stand ard iz a tion Glissant might 
call trans par ency. As an Enlightenment 
prin ciple of univer sal ism, trans par ency, for 
Glissant, claims to make a person fully 
intel li gible and inter pretable, and thus is a 
barbar ism, as it destroys the opacity of 
another. 
 Opacity is a paradig matic concept to pit 
against the univer sal stand ards of inform-
atic iden ti ﬁ c a tion. According to Glissant, 
opacity persists as onto logy – it is the 
world in rela tion. Th erefore, struggles for 
opacity are not oriented towards gaining 
opacity, as we are always already opaque; 
rather, it is that power viol ates opacity, 
which must be resisted as a commit ment 
to anti- imper ial polit ics. Th is is precisely 
 INFORMATIC OPACITY  
 As early as the 1970s, Caribbean philo-
sopher and poet Édouard Glissant theor-
ized opacity as an anti- imper ial modal ity of 
rela tion and exist ence. His evoc at ive 
demand that ‘we clamor for the right to 
opacity for every one’ refuses a logic of total 
trans par ency and ration al ity, disrupt ing the 
trans form a tion of subjects into categor iz-
able objects of Western know ledge ( Glissant 
1997 : 194). Opacity, Glissant tells us, 
concerns ‘that which protects the Diverse’, 
that is, the minor it arian (ibid.: 62). Although 
his writ ings oft en evade an engage ment 
with tech no logy – or are overtly tech no-
phobic – newfound urgen cies arise to 
consider Glissant’s philo sophy of opacity 
within the context of tech nics in the early 
twenty- ﬁ rst century. Whether innov a tions 
in Big Data, secret data sweeps of govern-
mental surveil lance or the growing popular-
ity of the Quantiﬁ ed Self, the world’s people 
are increas ingly reduced to aggreg ates of 
pars able data. Alexander R. Galloway and 
Eugene Th acker have described this era as 
one of ‘univer sal stand ards of iden ti ﬁ c a tion’ 
( Galloway 
and 
Th acker 
2007 : 
131). 
Technologies such as biomet rics,  GPS , 
 RFID , data- mining algorithms, collab or at-
ive ﬁ lters,  DNA  and genom ics become 
oper a tional through global proto cols that 
aim to solve ‘today’s crises of locat ab il ity 
and iden ti ﬁ c a tion’, for govern ments, milit-
ar ies, corpor a tions, and indi vidu als alike 
(ibid.). Th ese iden ti ﬁ c a tion tech no lo gies 
gain ascend ence in a time of neolib er al ism, 
 I