PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN SEXUALITY

politico- aesthetic subject iden tit ies (in ﬂ ux 
or as a stand point iden tity) and the extent 
to which posthu man iden tit ies and their 
rela tion ship with sex and sexu al ity, and 
indeed their very deﬁ n i tion of ‘sex’, is 
contested. Aft er Foucault’s decon struc tion 
of sexu al ity as a social gene a lo gical project 
of social control of bodies and pleas ure, 
femin ism took up sexu al ity as isomorph ic-
ally annexed to male pleas ure and the 
phallus, both projects showing there has 
never been anything biolo gical or natural 
about sex. Foucault forsook the term for 
‘pleas ure’, Deleuze and Guattari for ‘desire’ 
and femin ists such as Irigaray and Kristeva 
for ‘jouis sance’. All three share a conﬁ g ur a-
tion of a desig ni ﬁ ed and dereg u lated body 
where no part of the body stands as the 
domin ant signi ﬁ er of either sex or gender 
(formerly the phallus but also the 
proscribed licit and illicit sexual oper a tions 
of all body parts in rela tion with each 
other). Th ey also share a refusal of act 
produ cing subject so the over arch ing 
binary of hetero norm ativ ity and homo-
sexu al ity and its modern history from 
crim inal aber ra tion to equal normal ized 
subject posi tion is defunct. Salient to this, 
posthu man sexu al ity is entirely extric ated 
from repro duc tion’s rela tion ship with sex; 
because it renor mal izes gendered roles 
within repro duc tion, because it is antag on-
istic to posthu man ism’s celeb ra tion of the 
hybrid and hybrids are sterile, and due to 
the ahuman’s advoc a tion of human extinc-
tion in the face of over pop u la tion. 
Posthuman sexu al ity values connectiv ity 
between entit ies which could be two, or two 
parts within one, or two assemblages, to 
create imagin at ive ﬂ ows of desire, and two 
simply marks the over throw of the domin-
ant singu lar ity of the phallus, but posthu-
man sexu al ity is not limited to two. In this 
sense ‘two’ simply indic ates more than and 
less than one, a posi tion to which the 
trans versal assemblages of indi vidu als 
who do not see a binary cut between 
thought and action, life and death, envir-
on ment and human ity, or anim al ity and 
human ity. Th is is a similar process to what 
Braidotti terms the prac tice of ‘defam il ar-
iz a tion’ in which ‘the knowing subject 
disen gages itself from the domin ant 
norm at ive vision he or she had become 
accus tomed to, to evolve towards a post -
hu man frame of refer ence’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 
167). Th is allows us to think of a micro-
polit ics of life as  zoe (as mater ial embod ied 
singu lar ity) which contests the order ing 
molar polit ics of Life as  bios (under stood as 
tran scend ental and always already male). 
Th is micro pol it ical encounter with the law 
undoes the impos i tion of a biopol it ical 
order ing on indi vidu als and allows them, 
through their own continu ous inter ven-
tion in the domains of law and polit ics, to 
perform an active and contest at ory form 
of citizen ship. 
 See also Bodies Politic; Geo-Hydro-Solar-
Bio-Techno-Politics; Posthuman Critical 
Th eory; Critical Posthumanism; (Un)
Documented 
Citizenship; 
Posthuman 
Disability and DisHuman Studies. 
 Patrick Hanaﬁ n 
 POSTHUMAN SEXUALITY  
 It is not suﬃ   cient to liber ate sexu al ity; it is 
also neces sary to liber ate ourselves from the 
notion of sexu al ity itself. 
 Foucault 2000 : 245 
 Posthuman sexu al ity ques tions the utility 
of the very concept of sexu al ity itself and 
for this reason ranges across a dispar ate 
number of terrains includ ing femin ism, 
 LGBTQIA theory, therian and becom ing- 
fabu lated subjectiv ity among others. Th ese 
terrains overlap in the extent to which