PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SPECULATIVE POSTHUMANISM

be as much a step- change in the devel op-
ment of life on earth as the emer gence of 
humans from non- humans ( Vinge 1993 ). 
Humans might be no more able to grasp a 
post- singu lar ity world than mice are able 
to grasp concepts in number theory. Th ey 
would be lost in a world of essen tially 
incom pre hens ible and unknow able gods. 
 But suppose a singu lar ity is not tech nic-
ally possible. Maybe there are hard limits on 
intel li gence (in this universe at least). Maybe 
the scen ario does not adequately nuance the 
notion of intel li gence. Still, Vinge’s scen-
ario  raises a troub ling issue concern ing 
our capa city to eval u ate the long- run 
consequences of our tech nical activ ity in 
areas such as the  NBIC tech no lo gies. Th is is 
because it presup poses a weaker, thus more 
plaus ible, spec u lat ive claim:  our tech nical 
activ ity could gener ate forms of life signi ﬁ c-
antly alien or ‘other’ to ours . 
 If posthu man life could be signi ﬁ c antly 
alien or ‘weird’ then we might not be in a 
posi tion to under stand it easily, making 
the eval u ation of prospect ive discon nec-
tions prob lem atic. Do we insist on adopt-
ing a humans- ﬁ rst perspect ive on our 
tech nical activ ity even though we, or our 
wide descend ants, may cease to be human? 
Critical posthu man ism implies that the 
priv ileging of human life is ille git im ate. 
But what if – as Vinge fears – we may be 
simply unable to under stand the things we 
(our descend ants) might become? 
 Much depends, here, on the scope for 
posthu man weird ness. Do we have an  a 
priori (hence future- proof) grip on how 
strange our posthu man successors could be? 
 Th ere are two opposed perspect ives on 
this: 
an 
anthro po lo gic ally 
bounded 
posthu man ism ( ABP ) and an anthro po lo-
gic ally unboun ded posthu man ism ( AUP ). 
 ABP  states that there are tran scend ental 
condi tions for agency that humans would 
neces sar ily share with posthu mans in 
virtue of being agents at all. 
 For example, maybe all serious agency 
requires mastery of language or the ability 
to parti cip ate in social prac tices. Perhaps 
all agents must be capable of pleas ure and 
pain, must apply Kant’s categor ies or be 
Heideggerian  Dasein . If so, there are limits 
to posthu man weird ness and the extent to 
which posthu mans can exceed our under-
stand ing. 
 Do we have evid ence for such 
constraints? If we don’t, we should adopt 
an  unboun ded posthu man ism accord ing to 
which there are no future- proof grounds 
for viewing posthu mans as agents of a 
partic u lar kind.  AUP has the discom fort-
ing consequence, though, that we could 
only eval u ate the ethical perspect ives of 
posthu mans by encoun ter ing or becom ing 
them. 
 If  AUP is right, human ists and 
transhuman ists have seri ously under es-
tim ated the inhu man ism our tech no lo-
gical predic a ment (Roden 2014: ch. 7). We 
are not yet in a posi tion to eval u ate the 
ethics of posthu man ity, but we can only 
do so by precip it at ing an event whose 
consequences are incal cul able this side of a 
discon nec tion.  AUP and  DT jointly imply 
that there can be no general ethics of the 
posthu man, only multiple lines of  posthu-
man becom ing and exper i ment a tion with 
posthu man forms of life and being. At this 
point, argu ably, the perspect ives of  CP  and 
 SP converge. 
 See also Computational Turn; Artiﬁ cial 
intel li gence; 
Critical 
Posthumanism; 
Rationalist Inhumanism; Transhumanism/
Posthumanism; Xenofeminism. 
 Note 
 1.  NBIC 
stands 
for ‘Nanotechnology, 
Biotechnology, Information Technology, 
and Cognitive Science’. 
 David Roden