PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PLASTICITY

Malabou’s thought. In the attempt to 
adhere to a plastic ‘abso lute’, she impreg-
nates Hegel’s two senses of plas ti city with a 
third: a plas ti city of destruc tion or decon-
struc tion. 
 While it can be said that Malabou’s 
notion of plas ti city is to some degree a 
return to Hegel, she also believes that her 
own version of the concept is uniquely of 
our own time in two key ﬁ elds: in terms of 
philo sophy it is able to over come the key 
concepts of the previ ous epochs, thus 
placing philo sophy in a posi tion of (once 
again) being uniquely of its time, and in 
terms of science plas ti city oﬀ ers, in 
Malabou’s view, the best account of neuro-
bi o logy, which opens up the possib il ity of 
a new mater i al ism. She believes that 
plas ti city is the ‘domin ant formal motif of 
inter pret a tion and the most product ive 
exeget ical and heur istic tool of our time’ 
( Malabou 2009a : 57). It is with regard to 
this claim that Malabou ﬁ nds an expres-
sion of her own notion of plas ti city in the 
capa city of brain damage to completely 
destroy 
someone’s 
person al ity, 
while 
retain ing the option for a new person al ity 
to emerge (through the other senses of 
plas ti city). She then points towards the fact 
that this kind of capa city, that is inher ent 
to the brain synapses, lies radic ally outside 
of the psycho ana lytic mode of explan a tion 
(although Freud local izes this extern al ity 
in the possib il ity of trauma, in the epitomic 
‘beyond’ 
of 
the 
pleas ure 
prin ciple) 
( Malabou 2007 : 79). Since the psycho ana-
lytic ability to explain is, like its ideal ist and 
phenomen o lo gical prede cessors, strictly 
depend ent on what psychic reality allows 
us access to, Malabou attempts to develop 
the topo logy of the brain wound as a 
plastic way of relat ing to a realm of mater-
i al ity that is inde pend ent of the subject iv-
ism involved in avenues of research which 
are depend ent on a psychic reality (recent 
research in biology and neur o logy also 
that is up to the task to carry out progress-
ive socio- polit ical analysis (this attempt 
natur ally allies Malabou with Slavoj Žižek, 
Judith Butler and Adrian Johnston). 
Ultimately, Malabou seeks to develop a 
mater i al ism that func tions as the basis of a 
new philo sophy of spirit. ( Malabou 2012b : 
212) Since her disser ta tion,  Th e Future of 
Hegel , Malabou has been concerned with a 
Hegelianism that is able to have a sense for 
the future, despite Martin Heidegger’s 
claims to the contrary ( Malabou 2004 : 5). 
In order to address this ques tion, she 
adapts the Hegelian concept of plas ti city, 
in a strategy which, follow ing a clas sic ally 
decon struc tion ist meth od o logy, accords 
a relat ively insig ni ﬁ c ant element of Hegel’s 
argu ment a tion a power which is able 
to, avant la lettre, deal with latter- day 
Heideggerian concerns regard ing time. 
Where Malabou resol utely diﬀ ers from her 
disser ta tion super visor Jacques Derrida is 
in the fact that she aims to use this concept 
to vindic ate the use of dialectics as a 
method of philo soph ical and social 
analysis, rather than completely destabil ize 
it. Although Hegel did not intend the third 
meaning of plas ti city (explos ive plas ti city), 
it is an essen tial part of Malabou’s project 
to read back into Hegel this explos ive side 
of subjectiv ity, which she believes Hegel 
anti cip ated in some respects ( Malabou 
2009a : 9). 
 In terms of her central prob lem atic, 
Malabou professes a fascin a tion with 
notions which allow for an ampli ﬁ c a tion 
of their onto lo gical scope (such as time 
in Heidegger and writing in Derrida) 
( Malabou 2009a : 13). She believes that it is 
a certain histor ical tend ency that enables 
these notions to come forth in their 
respect ive epochs. In her insist ence on this 
histor icity, all the while still cling ing to the 
meta- applic ab il ity of her own notion of 
plas ti city, it becomes abund antly clear that 
Hegelianism really lies at the core of