PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NETWORKED AFFECT

socially delayed – writing itself emerges as 
the semi osis that perfuses the natural 
world. Communication is re- described 
here as an emer gent evol u tion ary process 
shared out whenever social autopoieses 
chance to happen. As we continue to learn, 
these processes are in no way exclus ive to 
human beings. Th ey occur as not only 
among non- human animals; they also go 
all the way down to the microbes ( Ben-
Jacob et  al. 2004 ). ‘Nearly all our prede-
cessors assumed that humans have some 
immense import ance, either mater ial or 
tran scend ental. We picture human ity as 
one among other micro bial phenom ena’ 
( Margulis and Sagan 1997 : 18–19). Th e 
signa ture gesture of neocy ber netic post-
human ism is to change our prior notions 
about human prior ity by adjust ing worldly 
rela tions between the human and the non- 
human in a manner that honours their co- 
depend ent auto nom ies. 
 See also Extended Cognition; Non-Human 
Agency; Posthumanism; Technicity. 
 Bruce Clarke 
 NETWORKED AFFECT  
 Counter to ration al ized concep tu al iz a tions 
of network media as an issue of inform a-
tion manage ment, retrieval and exchange, 
online commu nic a tions are not merely 
about storing and sharing data but also 
about the spread, attach ment, ampli ﬁ c a-
tion and dissip a tion of aﬀ ect ive intens it ies. 
Network media help to shape and form 
connec tions and discon nec tions between 
diﬀ er ent bodies, both human and non- 
human. Th ese prox im it ies and distances, 
again, may inter mesh and layer with the 
bodily intens it ies of sexual titil la tion, polit-
ical passions or their abstrac tion in the 
creation of monet ary value alike. 
 As the capa city of bodies to aﬀ ect and 
be aﬀ ected by one another (e.g.  Spinoza 
1992 ;  Massumi 2015a ), aﬀ ect cuts across, 
and joins together, bodies human and non- 
human, organic and machine, mater ial and 
concep tual – across bodies of ﬂ esh and 
those of thought ( Deleuze 1988b : 127; 
 Gatens 2000 ). Following Spinoza ( 1992 ), 
bodies and their capa cit ies are constantly 
shaped and modi ﬁ ed in their encoun ters 
with the world and the other bodies inhab-
it ing it. Such encoun ters may then increase 
or dimin ish, aﬃ  rm or under mine their life 
forces and poten tial to act. Th e notion of 
networked aﬀ ect ( Paasonen, Hillis and 
Petit 2015 ) is a means to address these 
inter con nec tions as the circu la tion and 
oscil la tion of intens ity in the frame work 
of online commu nic a tion that involves a 
pleth ora of actors. Th ese include indi vidual 
users, more- or-less emer gent collect ive 
bodies, human and non- human and thus 
also devices, plat forms, applic a tions, inter-
faces, compan ies, ﬁ les and threads. 
 Addressing aﬀ ect as being networked 
results in posi tion ing it as always already 
in- between diﬀ er ent bodies. It is some-
thing that emerges in encoun ters between 
them, that shapes these encoun ters and 
anim ates the bodies involved. Instead of 
being artic u lated as an issue of indi vidual 
capa city or prop erty, aﬀ ect, under stood 
as networked, is that which makes 
things matter and gather atten tion. 
Additionally, it possibly adds to the indi-
vidual sense of live li ness as intens ity that 
rever ber ates with personal embod ied 
histor ies, orient a tions and values (Ahmed 
2004;  Cho 2015 ). Such a framing does 
not situate networked aﬀ ect as either 
visceral gut reac tions speciﬁ c to the 
human or as nonhu man pre- personal 
poten ti al ity. Rather, it allows for an exam-
in a tion of how intens it ies shape our 
ubiquit ous networked exchanges, how 
they circu late, oscil late and become