PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FOUR ELEMENTS

masks, a reminder of the gas masks of the 
First World War. 
 Based on the analyses presen ted here it 
is possible to repop u late the diagram with 
new funda mental elements:  EARTH : dust; 
 WATER : blood;  AIR : lethal fogs;  FIRE : 
ﬂ am mables. 
Wrapped 
around 
these 
elements is the plan et ary phylum, a great 
tellurian cable bunch with its own 
products:  EARTH : elec tron ics;  WATER : 
liquid it ies like water bottled in plastic, 
which throws forward diagram matic 
intens it ies in the explo sion of plastic 
debris;  AIR : gases (green house); and 
 FIRE : smoul der ing car tyres, slashed rain-
forests and seasonal wild ﬁ res in the great 
north ern forests. However, as we have seen, 
the new elements combine both in exist ing 
directly – blood mixed with dust in the 
extrac tion of conﬂ ict miner als and oil 
ﬁ elds, or methane, a ﬂ am mable unnat ur-
ally mingled with the water supply, and 
which contrib utes to the green house gas 
eﬀ ect – and by means of espe cially commu-
nic at ive matters, like micro scopic frag-
ments of plastics that perfuse the oceans 
and get into the food chain, and consti tute 
ﬁ ne dusts that aﬀ ect respir a tion, settling 
among the fogs, gases and lethal clouds. 
Today, condensed air is a toxic dust of 
frayed oil- based mater i als. Th e example of 
blood as a general liquid of exchange 
extends beyond the human to the moun-
tain goril las butchered for bush meat to 
feed the armies and labour ers engaged in 
‘freel ance’ mining oper a tions. Th is is 
neither an envir on mental nor an aesthet ics 
of the elements, but an unruly diagram of 
abom in able 
combin a tions 
and 
post- 
natural forces and substances. 
 See also Anthropocene; Earth; Geo-
mythologies; Terrestrial. 
 Gary Genosko
but will change accord ing to the game; 
wild also has meant barbaric, savage or 
that which the civil ized opposes. It refers 
oft en to a so- called state of nature, whatever 
that may be, and has recently been used to 
refer to the prac tice of going oﬀ  the grid or 
behav ing in a chaotic or anarchic manner. 
 Wild, in a modern sense, has been used 
to signify that which lies outside of civil iz a-
tion or modern ity. It has a racial ized valence 
and a sense of anachron ism. It is a tricky 
word to use but it is a concept that we cannot 
live without if we are to combat the conven-
tional modes of rule that have synched 
social norms to economic prac tices and 
have created a world order where every 
form of disturb ance is quickly folded back 
into quiet; every ripple is quickly smoothed 
over; every instance of erup tion has been 
tamped down and turned into new evid ence 
of the right ness of the status quo. 
 For my project, ‘the wild’ is not a place, 
person or prac tice; it is a poten tial in the 
sense that José E. Muñoz describes the 
queer ness of poten ti al ity: ‘Queerness is 
essen tially about the rejec tion of a here 
and now and an insist ence on poten ti al ity 
or concrete possib il ity for another world’ 
( Muñoz 2009 : 1). Th e wild is not what 
limns the present, what lies outside of the 
bounded here and now, it is some thing that 
we already conjure from within the here 
and now – we constantly call it into being. 
Wildness does not exist separ ately from 
our desire to break loose from a set of 
constraints or a determ ined under stand-
ing of what is appro pri ate, good and right. 
 GAGA FEMINISM  
 My book  Gaga Feminism: Sex, Gender and 
the End of Normal ( Halberstam 2012 ) has 
made the claim that the ‘exist ing condi-
tions’ under which the build ing blocks of 
human iden tity were imagined and cemen-
ted in the last century – what we call 
gender, sex, race and class – have changed 
so radic ally that new life can be glimpsed 
ahead. Our task is not to shape this new life 
into iden ti ﬁ  able and comfort ing forms, not 
to ‘know’ this ‘newness’ in advance, but 
rather, as Nietzsche suggests, to impose 
upon the categor ical chaos and crisis that 
surrounds us only ‘as much regu lar ity and 
form as our prac tical needs require’ 
( Nietzsche 1968 : 278). In new work, I build 
upon ideas from  Gaga Feminism and begin 
to develop a theory of queer anarch ism 
from a new compan ion project titled  Th e 
Wild , in order to weave a story about emer-
gent and posthu man forms of life through 
the glimpses we catch of it in popular 
culture and subcul tural produc tion. 
 Th e wild as a concept has lost its 
meaning in our age of post- civil iz a tion 
devel op ment, post- indus trial produc tion 
and post- iden tity being. As a word,  wild 
comes from old or middle English and 
refers to undo mestic ated modes of life, 
disorderly beha viour, the lack of moral 
restraint, excess in all kinds of forms, the 
erratic, the untamed, the savage. When 
refer ring to nature, the wild tends to mean 
unaltered by human contact: in card 
games, a ‘wild card’ lacks an intrinsic value 
 G