PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GAGA FEMINISM

My use of this word, a word laden with 
meaning, satur ated with sense drawn from 
colo nial and ecolo gical contexts, repres-
ents an attempt to stretch our crit ical 
vocab u lar ies in diﬀ er ent direc tions – away, 
for example, from the used- up languages 
of diﬀ er ence, alter ity, subver sion and 
resist ance and towards languages of unpre-
dict ab il ity, break down, disorder and shift -
ing forms of signi ﬁ c a tion. 
 In  Gaga Feminism , I track the action of 
‘going gaga’ as some thing that Lady Gaga 
chan nels but that is not partic u lar to her. 
Instead, I show how Lady Gaga’s global 
visib il ity hides a much longer history of 
wild and oft en punk female perform ances. 
Th e name Gaga, supposedly taken from 
the Queen song ‘Radio Ga Ga’, signi ﬁ es the 
creat ive mayhem that has spread through 
our sex gender systems and Lady Gaga 
herself occu pies several sites of radical 
ambi val ence and ambi gu ity and embod ies 
these shift s in the meaning of desire. For 
example, when rumours ﬂ ew around the 
inter net about Lady Gaga being inter-
sexed, she refused to deny the rumours 
about her own genital ambi gu ity in a 
phobic way. Gaga has said instead in an 
inter view with Barbara Walters: ‘I portray 
myself in a very andro gyn ous way and I 
love andro gyny.’ 1 Like David Bowie, Lady 
Gaga cruises on her appeal to male and 
female fans, and like Grace Jones, she 
alters the meaning of femin ine icon icity 
through refus ing to operate within the 
rules of popular consump tion that would 
freeze her through complex processes of 
fetish iz a tion. 
 Th e ambi gu ity that surrounds and even 
deﬁ nes Lady Gaga – genital, musical, 
aesthetic – allows her to both ques tion and 
revel in spec tac u lar forms of femin in ity. It 
also signi ﬁ es as a vivid example of posthu-
man modes of inhab it ing the body. In a 
post- femin ist age when young women 
both beneﬁ t from and simul tan eously 
deny leaps that have been engin eered by 
femin ism, we should explore care fully the 
new idioms of glamour and femin in ity as 
they appear within the perform ance- scape 
of stars like Lady Gaga. Like Poly Styrene, 
Grace Jones and Pauline Black before her, 
Lady Gaga creates alter egos, she syncs pop 
and punk sounds and she mixes dance 
stut ters into sonic hiccups to create a spas-
modic femin in ity that lurches and jerks 
into action. She also confuses the bound ar-
ies between internal and external, both 
high light ing the ways in which girls are 
forced to see them selves always as ‘image’ 
and contest ing that image by revel ling in a 
radical, Warholesque super ﬁ  ci al ity. Going 
gaga is not simply being Gaga, it is a 
journey to the edge of sense – Grace Jones 
goes gaga in her cover version of Joy 
Division’s ‘She’s Lost Control’ and Poly 
Styrene went gaga on ‘Oh Bondage Up 
Yours!’ While mascu line versions of going 
gaga take on heroic propor tions in rock 
history (guitar smash ing, strip ping on 
stage, crowd surﬁ ng), femin ine ecstatic 
perform ance is read quickly as sexual 
excess, ward robe malfunc tion or psycho lo-
gical break down. In Lady Gaga, however, 
femin ine perform at ive excess ﬁ nds a new 
perform ance horizon and hovers between 
madness, mayhem and the dark side. 
 While many readers of  Gaga Feminism 
read the book as a kind of homage to Lady 
Gaga herself, the ﬁ gure of Lady Gaga was 
repres ent at ive rather than authorial – in 
other words, her partic u lar synchron iz a-
tion of perform ance, sensa tion al ism, hyper 
and hypo femin in it ies, aﬀ ect, styl iz a tion 
and anim ated ness falls within the new and 
shift  ing bound ar ies of iden tity and embod-
i ment within what we call posthu man ism. 
I was not, there fore, trying to track who 
Lady Gaga was and what her perform at ive 
legacy might be so much as account for the 
partic u lar shape within which popular ity 
and newness fuse.