PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN ETHICS

● keeps in mind the perni cious and 
stiﬂ ing impacts of ableism, which we 
deﬁ ne as a discrim in at ory processes 
that ideal ize a narrow version of 
human ness and reject more diverse 
forms of human ity; 
 ● seeks to promote trans dis cip lin ary 
forms of empir ical and theor et ical 
enquiry that breaks discip lin ary 
ortho dox ies, domin ances and 
bound ar ies; 
 ● fore grounds dis/ability as the complex 
for inter rog at ing oppres sion and 
further ing a posthu man polit ics of 
aﬃ  rm a tion. 
 To join our assemblage, please visit www.
dishuman.com. 
 See also Joy; Process Ontologies; Non-
Human Agency 
 Dan Goodley, Rebecca 
Lawthom, Kirsty Liddiard and 
Katherine Runswick-Cole  
 POSTHUMAN ETHICS  
 Posthuman Ethics devel ops from a stream 
of philo sophy along the traject ory of 
Spinoza’s ethics, Nietzsche’s concept of will 
as liber at ive freedom from insti tutes of 
power and post struc tural contin ental philo-
sophy’s expan sion of these theor ists. Th e 
basic premise, from Spinoza, sees the world, 
expans ive into the entire cosmos, as inter-
con nec ted. Individuality is under stood as 
dividu ation where each entity exerts force 
or expres sion that aﬀ ects other entit ies and 
is simul tan eously aﬀ ected by the expressiv-
ity of other entit ies. Th e nature of these 
forces of expres sion and aﬀ ec tion is not 
known in advance. Th is emphas izes that 
each entity is entirely unique to itself based 
on the quality of its speciﬁ c expres sions and 
polit ics of self- advocacy of people with 
intel lec tual disab il it ies, many groups adopt 
the moniker of People First, which is a very 
human istic title. Disability polit ics work the 
edges of posthu man and human ist polit ics. 
 Conclusion: A DisHuman Manifesto 
 Posthuman disab il ity studies seek to 
capture the disrupt ive and aﬃ  rm at ive 
inter ven tions of disab il ity. Our sense is 
that the condi tions of disab il ity and the 
posthu man neces sar ily share a disavowal 
of the human. Th is has led us to develop 
 DisHuman Studies which, we contend, 
simul tan eously acknow ledges the possib il-
it ies oﬀ ered by disab il ity to trouble, reshape 
and re- fashion the human (crip and 
posthu man ambi tions) while at the same 
time assert ing disabled people’s human ity 
(norm at ive and human istic desires). We 
ﬁ nish, there fore, with our DisHuman 
mani festo, which we hope captures the 
poten tial of a posthu man disab il ity studies. 
DisHuman studies: 
 ● unpacks and troubles domin ant 
notions of what it means to be human;  
 ● celeb rates the disrupt ive poten tial of 
disab il ity to trouble these domin ant 
notions; 
 ● acknow ledges that being recog nized as 
a regular normal human being is 
desir able, espe cially for those people 
who have been denied access to the 
category of the human; 
 ● recog nizes disab il ity’s inter sec tional 
rela tion ship with other iden tit ies that 
have been considered less than human 
(asso ci ated with class, gender, sexu al ity, 
ethni city, age); 
 ● aims to develop theory, research, 
art and activ ism that push at the 
bound ar ies of what it means to be 
human and disabled;