PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEOCOLONIAL

human it ies and object- oriented onto logy 
and spec u lat ive realism and mater i al ism) 
to cooper ate and share bibli o graph ies, 
public a tions and schol ar ships. 
 See also Posthuman Critical Th eory; 
Ecosophy; Feminist Posthumanities; Mat-
tering; Object- oriented Ontology; Proc-
ess Ontologies; Quantum Anthropology; 
Material Feminisms. 
 Iris van der Tuin  
 NEOCOLONIAL  
 Th e neoco lo nial indic ates condi tions that 
resus cit ate, or re- enact, colo nial dynam ics. 
Th erefore the term ‘neoco lo nial’ is clearly 
connec ted to the notion of post co lo ni al-
ism. But rather than marking the over com-
ing of colo nial domin a tions (through 
decol on iz a tion, inde pend ence and cultural 
autonomy), it indic ates an ongoing persist-
ence of colo nial traces as well as new 
hegemonic form a tions. Th ese are not 
neces sar ily related to territ orial domin a-
tion; rather they are linked to more diﬀ use 
forms of economic, milit ary, ﬁ nan cial, 
envir on mental, cultural and tech no lo gical 
suprem a cies (see  Planetary ). 
 It could be argued that the term ‘post co-
lo ni al ism’ has emerged not only to contest 
past imper ial legacies but also to account 
for current neoco lo nial form a tions, which 
continue modes of imper i al ist actions 
and ideo lo gies in contem por ary global 
contexts ( Huggan 1997 ). Th is implies that 
the colo nial era is not over but also that 
colo nial ‘remains’ ( Stoler 2008 ;  Amin 2010 ; 
 Young 2012 ) have impacted beyond 
civiliza tional terms and are intrinsic to 
the combined and uneven devel op mental 
logic of the modern world system ( Spivak 
1991 ,  1999 ;  Dirlik 1994 ;  Wallerstein 2004 ; 
 Lazarus 2011 ). Th e term ‘neoco lo nial’ 
also dismantles simple centre–peri phery 
divides – north and south, First World and 
Th ird World – re- artic u lat ing power struc-
tures within ﬂ ows and nodes that can be 
either local or global ( Appadurai 1996 ; 
 Castells 2007 ). Neocolonialism obfus cates 
and complic ates clear- cut divides, produ-
cing more oblique and insi di ous struc tures 
of transna tional depend ency. Issues of 
nation, gender, race, ethni city, class, reli-
gion and sexual orient a tions are reor gan-
ized, not only in rela tion to the colo nial but 
also to neolib eral form a tions, in which the 
‘econom iz a tion of everything’ corrodes 
public insti tu tions, social justice and demo-
cracy itself ( Brown 2015 ). 
 Th e issue of capit al ism is central to the 
debates on neoco lo ni al ism (see  Capitalocene 
and Chthulucene ), as the invest ment of 
foreign capital is seen to be used not for the 
purpose of the devel op ment of former 
colon ies, or under developed coun tries, but 
as a new form of domin a tion, control and 
subjec tion. Th e economic and ﬁ nan cial 
power of more advanced coun tries is 
seen as protract ing the impov er ish ment of 
less developed coun tries, or of promot ing 
biased notions of devel op ment and 
progress. Th ere are many instances of 
human it arian 
aid 
( Chouliaraki 
2014 ; 
 Grewal 2014 ), devel op ment inter ven tions 
( Enloe 1989 ) and peace mak ing missions 
( Henry 2015 ) that support the export and 
impos i tion of neoco lo nial models of 
economic growth and polit ical demo cracy, 
and that thwart the eﬃ  c acy of grass roots 
organ iz a tions 
and 
move ments. 
Th is 
contrib utes to a renewed form of control 
and inﬂ u ence under the guise of solid ar ity, 
charity campaigns and human rights activ-
ism, contrib ut ing to a protrac ted repres ent-
a tion of victim hood and back ward ness 
versus the homo gen ous and univer sal 
propos i tion of a common human ity and 
happi ness ( Mohanty 1984 ;  Benhabib 2002 ; 
 Berlant 2011 ).