PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FEMINIST POSTHUMANITIES

ground of being, my dream is a version of 
the posthu man that embraces the possi -
b il it ies 
of 
inform a tion 
tech no lo gies 
without being seduced by fantas ies of 
unlim ited 
power 
and 
disem bod ied 
immor tal ity, that recog nizes and cele -
b rates ﬁ nitude as a condi tion of human 
being, and that under stands human life is 
embed ded in a mater ial world of great 
complex ity, one on which we depend for 
our contin ued survival. 
 1999: 5 
 From early work on the cyborg ( Haraway 
1991 ) to more recent work on agen tial 
realism ( Barad 2003 ;  2007 ), the posthu-
man has proven to be product ive for an 
onto lo gical polit ics of femin ist and crit ical 
theory, as exhib ited by Rosi Braidotti 
( 2013 ). 
 Posthumanities as Embedded and 
Embodied Knowledges of Worlds- in- 
the- making  
 Posthumanities, a slightly diﬀ er ent yet 
related term, stands then as the oper a tion-
al iz a tion of such more- than-human schol-
ar ship ( Whatmore 2002 ,  2012 ;  Wolfe 
2010 ): posthu man it ies work recog nizes 
the role of the non- human for the human 
of the human it ies. Th e book series 
‘Posthumanities’, inaug ur ated and edited 
by cultural and animal studies scholar 
Cary Wolfe, deﬁ nes itself as situ ated at a 
cross roads. Instead of ‘repro du cing estab-
lished forms and methods of discip lin ary 
know ledge, posthu man ists confront how 
changes in society and culture require 
that schol ars rethink what they do – 
theor et ic ally, meth od o lo gic ally, and ethic-
ally’ ( Minnesota University Press 2017 ). 
Similarly, Donna Haraway ( 2008 ), who has 
no patience with the over- determ ined 
notion of ‘the posthu man’, never the less 
ﬁ nds the term ‘useful’ for ‘track ing schol arly 
conver sa tions’ on the chan ging rela tion-
ships between the human and non- human, 
culture and nature, tech no logy and the 
body, and Other and Self. 
 Th e preﬁ x ‘post-’ here does not signal 
any kind of end, but rather the inclu sion 
of the human it ies in a perhaps counter- 
intu it ive move ment away from the con -
ven tional comfort zones of human- centred 
research at large. It ques tions and troubles 
human excep tion al ism ( Tsing 2011 ) and 
other norm at ive forms of chau vin isms. As 
such, posthu man it ies, like the nomadic 
trans vers al ity of femin ist analyses ( Braidotti 
1994 ), may well trans late and mutate into 
several bodies of thought across discip lines, 
while bene ﬁ t ing from, and contrib ut ing to, 
the analyt ical approaches developed within 
the human it ies. From situ ated know ledge 
( Haraway 1988 ), to embod ied and embed-
ded start ing points, to the multi valent 
corpor eal it ies ( Grosz 1994 ) that make or 
break the world, these approaches make for 
rich analyses. 
 Strange encoun ters are key to this 
endeav our, as is a will ing ness to expose 
oneself to alien a tion. Nothing remains 
natural or given, yet all is worldly and 
proces sual. Feminist posthu man it ies can 
contrib ute an oppos i tional conscious-
 ness – a double vision on renat ur al iz a tion 
and denat ur al iz a tion – as well as post- 
conven tional community- build ing (with 
scient ists, envir on ment al ists and animal 
and body activ ists). It provides crit ical and 
creat ive re- tool ings of the human sciences 
from their start ing points in the embod ied 
and embed ded world li ness of know ledge. 
Respectful conver sa tions across borders, 
processes of ‘rooting and shift  ing’ ( Yuval-
Davis 2012 ) are what might ensue at such 
cross roads. Feminist posthu man it ies is but 
one possible name for such encoun ters, as