PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ORGANIZATION IN PLATFORM CAPITALISM

redis tri bu tion of wealth and resources, the 
ques tion of organ iz a tion without sover-
eignty remains to be addressed. 
 Organization aimed at clutch ing power 
from above will do nothing in terms of 
forging a global grammar able to design 
concepts that critique and direct debates 
on issues and condi tions in order to regain 
the initi at ive. Cognitive capit al ism obtains 
power, in part, because of its binding capa-
city (see  Moulier Boutang 2011 ). It is able 
to distrib ute and imple ment a coher ent 
message across a vast range of insti tu tional 
and organ iz a tional settings. In other words, 
cognit ive capit al ism holds an elect ive aﬃ  n-
ity with tech no lo gies of medi ation. Rituals 
of organ iz a tion are required to galvan ize 
social ity in coher ent rather than perpetu-
ally dispersed forms and prac tice. 
 Where are the forms of organ iz a tion that 
regen er ate the collect ive conﬁ d ence that 
typi ﬁ ed the histor ical avant- garde? Can new 
modes of organ iz a tion func tion in a cent ri-
fu gal manner to escape the sectari an ism 
of the group dynamic? A decade ago we 
proposed the concept of organ ized networks 
as a new insti tu tional form in response to 
the ‘walled gardens’ of social media. We 
fore groun ded the need for a stra tegic turn 
that could address the problem of sustain-
ab il ity of social organ iz a tion. Neighbouring 
concepts such as ‘plat form cooper ativ ism’ 
and the many exper i ments in social centres 
and educa tional infra struc tures such as 
‘free thought’ are strong examples of how the 
work of inven tion is mani fest ing as new 
organ iz a tional forms. 2  
 A distrib uted labor at ory of thought is 
needed that fuses intel lec tual and polit ical 
inven tion without the clien tel ism of the 
think- tank model. A praxis that dispenses 
with the misguided senti ment of post- 
capit al ist econom ies and all the priv ilege 
that entails. Th e format of this gloss ary itself 
without an outside is submission with 
occasional resistance whose only eﬀ ect is 
to supply data- driven capit al ism with a 
surplus of records and related meta tags. 
 For all the attempts to estab lish a crit-
ical mass for altern at ive prac tices in the 
age of the Anthropocene, which mani fest 
as networks of organic food suppli ers, 
hipster maker econom ies, co- working 
spaces, urban garden ing and renew able 
ener gies, there remains a depend ency on 
main stream archi tec tures from global 
logist ics to data centres and the perpetu-
ation of an inter na tional divi sion of labour. 
Th ere is no visible prospect of these core 
plan et ary systems being over hauled or 
replaced. Despite the prolif er a tion of these 
sort of altern at ive prac tices, the decline in 
global working stand ards and employ ment 
oppor tun it ies is insep ar able from the 
penet rat ive force of ﬁ nan cial capit al ism. 
 However much the possib il ity of think-
ing the Hegelian total ity remains as a 
utopian posi tion from which to over come 
the frag ment a tion and dissip a tion of 
mater ial life caused by iden tit arian polit ics, 
the digital archi tec tures that oper a tion al ize 
the world increas ingly with draw from the 
grasp of the human. Even those such as 
Yanis Varoufakis, who have glimpsed the 
inner work ings of the tech no cratic elite, 
are unable to mani fest propos als for a 
move ment of the disaﬀ ected. Th e network 
imagin ary cannot on its own perform the 
work of imple ment a tion. Why? Because 
the stacks reign supreme. 
 Th e consol id a tion of resig na tion is one 
option. Th e ongoing agenda of the Mont 
Pèlerin Society is another. Th e regional 
geopol it ical giants in Putin’s Russia or the 
Beijing Consensus may, for all we know, 
deliver the path to restor a tion for a global 
future able to with stand the ravages of capit-
al ism in ways not reliant on Silicon Valley’s 
engin eer ing logic of techno- solu tion ism. 
But unless we wish to commit to a pater nal-