PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TRANS- CORPOR EAL ITY

Trans- corpor eal ity is not a mystical, 
spir itual, phenomen o lo gical or exper i en tial 
sense that ‘everything is connec ted’; it 
requires a radical rethink ing of onto lo gies 
and epistem o lo gies; it involves science, 
science studies, citizen science, femin ist 
theory, envir on mental theor ies, crit ical race 
studies, disab il ity studies, liter at ure, art and 
every day activ ism. Th inking the subject as a 
mater ial being, subject to the agen cies of the 
comprom ised, entangled world, enacts an 
envir on mental posthu man ism. Th e subject 
cannot be separ ated from networks of 
intra- active mater ial agen cies ( Barad 2007 ) 
and thus cannot ignore the disturb ing 
epistem o lo gical quandar ies of risk society 
( Beck 1992 ). Trans- corpor eal ity, as it 
reckons with mater ial agen cies that traverse 
substances, objects, bodies and envir on-
ments, entails reck on ing with scientiﬁ c 
captures, even as the data is always already 
‘mangled’ ( Pickering 1995 ) by social and 
economic forces. Scientiﬁ c inform a tion, 
produced by experts or ‘ordin ary experts’, is 
neces sary for trans- corpor eal mappings, 
which circu late through popular culture, 
politi cized communit ies and subcul tures, 
such as that of people with multiple chem-
ical sens it iv ity ( Alaimo 2010 ). 
 Trans- corpor eal ity discour ages fantas ies 
of tran scend ence and imper vi ous ness that 
render envir on ment al ism merely an elect-
ive and external enter prise. Even though 
trans- corpor eal ity emerged from envir on-
mental health and envir on mental justice 
move ments, which focus on (post)humans, 
the concept extends toward all species who 
ﬁ nd them selves at the cross roads of body 
and place. Th e posthu man ethics of trans- 
corpor eal ity insists that even the most 
routine human activ it ies, such as purchas-
ing plastics, impact human and non- human 
lives across vast geographic and temporal 
scales, extend ing even to the bottom of the 
sea ( Alaimo 2016 ). Th e bizarre enorm ity of 
the eﬀ ects of the most minute every day 
actions under scores the urgent need for 
rethink ing ethics and polit ics in the 
Anthropocene, an epoch in which human 
activ it ies have profoundly altered the planet. 
Cecilia Åsberg, Redi Koobak and Ericka 
Johnson contend that ‘Posthumanities as 
femin ist analyt ical prac tices work for us to 
re- tool the human it ies so as to meet up with 
the on- going trans form a tions of our worlds’ 
(2001: 228). Trans- corpor eal ity grapples 
with precisely how the trans form a tion of 
the world alters – or should alter – onto lo-
gies, epistem o lo gies, polit ics and ethics. 
While trans- corpor eal ity was not conceived 
under the sign of the Anthropocene, it 
nonethe less epitom izes the sort of posthu-
man ist onto lo gies in which there can be no 
‘nature’ outside the human. And yet the 
human is hardly the master of his domain 
but instead a site traversed by strange agen-
cies and immersed within entangled ethical 
and polit ical rela tions. While toxic chem ic-
als, radi ation, toxic e- waste from the global 
north dumped in the global south, indus-
trial agri cul ture, factory farming and animal 
exper i ment a tion are oft en over looked in 
predom in ant visual, theor et ical and popular 
accounts of the proposed anthro po genic 
geolo gical epoch, trans- corpor eal ity, with 
its atten tion to the discon cert ingly extens-
ive eﬀ ects of seem ingly benign consumer ist 
prac tices, under scores that they too are 
matters of concern for the Anthropocene. 
 Since trans- corpor eal ity involves unex-
pec ted trans its and cross ings, it may be 
ﬁ tting to conclude with a brief account of 
how trans- corpor eal ity has been taken up in 
diver gent and perhaps surpris ing ways. 
Christina Fredengren, in ‘Posthumanism, 
the Transcorporeal and Biomolecular 
Archaeology’, employs the concept in order 
to place archae olo gical data such as  DNA 
and isotope analysis ‘in a theor et ical frame’ 
that 
demon strates 
‘the 
entan gle ment 
between the skel eton, the visceral parts of 
the body and the envir on ment’ (2013: 59).