PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INSURGENT POSTHUMANISM

Martí, Oswald de Andrade and many 
others – we see how radical change passes 
through the posthu man ist trans form a tion 
of the mater i al ity and socio- ecolo gical 
rela tion al ity of the body ( Braidotti 2002 ). 
 As these posthu man ist move ments of 
the 1960s and aft er were gradu ally 
absorbed into the emer ging neolib eral 
transna tional governance they came to be 
called New Social Movements ( NSM s). 
And, indeed, those which weren’t already 
‘social’ became social in the way we 
commonly use the adject ive today: they 
turned primar ily to ques tions of iden tity, 
repres ent a tion 
and 
rights, 
polit ical 
governance and the account ab il ity of the 
state. With this change insur gent posthu-
man ist polit ics declined again, only to 
reappear in the wave of social mobil iz a-
tions that erupted at the begin ning of the 
twenty- ﬁ rst century and in partic u lar 
during the 2008 to 2013 cycle of social 
unrest. 
 What if social move ments action today 
is not just target ing exist ing polit ical power 
but is also exper i ment ing with worlds and 
the mater i al ity of life? Many current move-
ments engage directly with tech nos cience 
and mater ial/ecolo gical exper i ment a tion; 
they immerse into the human–non- human 
continuum and change society by enga ging 
with both the human and the non- human 
world ( Haraway 1997 ). Social move ments 
start to become more than social, move-
ments of matter and the social simul tan-
eously, move ments that change power by 
creat ing altern at ive forms of life that cannot 
be neglected by insti tuted polit ics. 
 Traditionally this power to create 
condi tions that cannot be neglected or 
bypassed has always involved the ques tion 
of viol ence. Against the purpor ted tight 
artic u la tion of viol ence and trans form a-
tion (primar ily as protest viol ence against 
the state), domin ant liberal human ist 
think ing asserts that viol ence starts where 
polit ics stops. Is it possible to escape the 
dicho tomy that opposes the viol ence of 
protest to the oppres sion of the state? Is it 
possible to commit to the funda mental 
possib il ity of non- viol ence, and simul tan-
eously promote justice and create altern at-
ive ways of exist ence? 
 For more than social move ments the 
ques tion of justice is a ques tion of tempor-
al ity: justice is now, justice is against defer-
ral; the space of defer ral is the space of 
destruct ive viol ence. A posthu man reading 
of Benjamin’s  Critique of Violence (1996) 
would see justice worlded through the re- 
appro pri ation of matter and the imme di-
ate making of altern at ive forms of life. 
Paradoxically this is the end of any form of 
viol ence, social or indi vidual. Th e more 
justice is concrete and mater ial, the more 
non- violent and collect ive it is. Th is is 
post an thro po centric history: it is not made 
through the eternal dialect ical struggle 
between 
constitu ent 
and 
consti tuted 
power; rather, history is made with and 
outside of the history of society, it is made 
when justice is restored mater i ally – a 
posthu man justice, the co- construc tion of 
just forms of life with other species and 
things. 
 Th e central ques tion facing more than 
social move ments is how this commit ment 
to justice can address the radical asym -
 met ries which pervade our human and non-
 hu man worlds. Symmetry is not enough to 
reverse the modern puri ﬁ c a tion of humans 
and non- humans ( Latour 1993 ) and to 
stop impos ing our ‘we’ – humans – on 
‘them’ – non- humans. We have never been 
modern not because the modern puri ﬁ c a-
tion is impossible but because we have 
never been ‘we’ and they – the non- humans 
– have never been ‘they’. Th e consti tu tion 
of modern ity is based on a set of univer sal-
isms that have their proven ance in colo nial 
expan sion ism and the spread of the colo-
nial matrix ( Quijano 2007 ).