PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
REAL COOL ETHICS

Sexuality, however, as we should know 
from the extens ive work of black femin ists 
of the 1970s and 1980s, is always already 
racial ized. By reading queer theory’s work 
on sexu al ity as the real in the speciﬁ c geo- 
onto logy of racial iz a tion, I argue we must, 
in the neolib eral episteme, read race as the 
real. Moreover, I argue that doing so may 
be the most prom ising avenue towards a 
creat ing a mean ing ful ethics in these 
dizzy ing times. 
 In  Way Too Cool: Selling Out Race and 
Ethics (2015) I argue that a neolib eral 
social ration al ity displaces the liberal 
subject of desire with a new form of 
subjectiv ity that, again in the Lacanian 
lexicon, can be aptly described as cruis ing 
the circuit of the drive. Th e drive, unlike 
desire and demand, does not aim at any 
object of satis fac tion. Structurally atele olo-
gical, its circuit ous form enlivens repe ti-
tion, rather than arrival, as the form of 
pleas ure. When read as cruis ing the circuit 
of the drive, neolib eral enter pris ing 
prac tices of consumer ism are, in and of 
them selves, quite satis fy ing. Practices of self-
 fash ion ing become prac tices of pleas ure 
and even freedom in neolib er al ism. Th e 
inﬁ n ity of the endless quest for cooler and 
cooler stuﬀ  – and cooler and cooler selves 
– is the ﬁ eld of subjectiv ity. For the neo-
lib eral subject, the endless prolif er a tion of 
interests stim u lated by the market, writ 
quite large, is the site of pleas ure, freedom 
and the self: the more you can intensify 
your interests, the more expans ive, enter-
pris ing and inter est ing you are. And the 
more you can stuﬀ  your mouth!  1 Th is 
extern ally cathec ted, quint es sen tially post- 
modern subject who glories in her super ﬁ -
ci al ity circu lates happily in the neolib eral 
world of endless images and consump tion: 
she is glor i ously no longer  human . 
 Th e neolib eral social ration al ity must 
feed this mouth, endlessly. Rather ingeni-
ously, it ﬁ nds perfect fodder in trans-
formed iter a tions of social diﬀ er ence: 
race, gender, sexu al ity, class, ability and the 
infam ous  etcet era all become cool accessor-
ies, little aesthet i cized nuggets scrubbed 
free of any nasty histor ies of viol ence. Th e 
metric of the market ﬂ at tens the diﬀ er ent 
forms of social diﬀ er ence into wholly 
fungible units. Commanded to ‘celeb rate 
diversity’, neolib eral subjects can no longer 
discern the diﬀ er ences, for example, 
between the increas ing elasti city of gender 
expres sion and intransigent anti- black 
racism. Classical liber al ism’s commit ments 
to toler ance, ener gized by its disavowal of 
xeno pho bia, no longer cathect neolib eral 
subjects. Th e neolib eral episteme rewires 
our most funda mental modes of social 
cathexes from xeno pho bia to cool ness: 
cruis ing the drive of diﬀ er ence, neolib eral 
subjects are swift ly becom ing way too cool. 
 Bringing an ethics of the real to bear, I 
argue one social diﬀ er ence is strik ingly 
unlike all others: race. Neoliberal subjects, 
espe cially in North America and Europe, 
are deeply confused, if not verging on a 
kind of madness, when it comes to matters 
of race. Whether uttered in mono- or 
multiracial settings, speech about race and 
racism sets oﬀ  all kinds of psycho so matic, 
histor ic ally mater ial and deeply suppressed 
dynam ics that will spin most conver sa tions 
into a twisted, carni valesque funhouse. 
Despite the pure excess of mater ial evi -
d ence that we are living in extraordin ar ily 
racist and violent cultures, we seem to have 
no language for it. It resists signi ﬁ c a tion. 
 Consequently, it might be fruit ful to 
under stand the complex phenom ena of 
neolib eral race, with its suppres sion of its 
roots in long violent histor ies of anti- black 
racism, as signalling and cathec t ing us to 
the real. Reading race as the real oﬀ ers a 
profound caution against falling back into 
iden tity categor ies to concep tu al ize and 
talk about race. Unhinged from its loca tion 
as the  objet a of clas sical liber al ism’s core