PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INTERMEDIALITY

bridges and in factor ies. So ingredi ents of 
inter me di al ity research are the product ive 
inter course of multi me dial artisti city, inter-
dis cip lin ary creativ ity and self- reﬂ ect ive 
concep tu al ity. 
 Intermediality developed itself into a 
serious academic ﬁ eld of research during 
the 1990s and has since produced a vast 
body of know ledge. Th e ﬁ rst debate and 
analyses appeared in Germany. Most of the 
research was done from a recep tion- 
aesthetic 
hermen eut ical 
perspect ive. 
French post- struc tur al ism, decon struct iv-
ism and philo sophy of diﬀ er ence provided 
new approaches. Yet the notion ‘inter-
me dia’ has its roots in early modern art. 
Samuel Coleridge coined the notion of 
‘inter me dium’ in 1812 to describe a liter ary 
process in which the func tion of symbol 
and allegory are compared (Coleridge, in 
 Raysor 1936 : 33). Th e term was rein tro-
duced by the Fluxus artist Dick Higgins: 
inter me dia. In a 1965 article he qual i ﬁ es 
the exper i ence of artworks that make use 
of two or more artistic media as inter-
me dial. In  Horizons: Th e Poetics and Th eory 
of the Intermedia  (1984) he elab or ates on 
the speciﬁ c meaning and analyt ical value 
of this notion. It is indic at ive that a member 
of the Fluxus move ment proposed this 
notion. In the 1960s Fluxus was an inter na-
tional network of artists, composers and 
design ers who blended diﬀ er ent artistic 
media and discip lines in their art prac tices. 
Th e move ment was inspired by John 
Cage and Marcel Duchamp. Th eir cross-
breed ing of perform ance, noise music, 
visual art, archi tec ture and design but 
also liter at ure –  Fluxus was the title of a 
magazine – had an expli citly anti- art and 
anti- commer cial sens ib il ity. Given this 
back ground it is possible to rewrite the 
history of twen ti eth- century avant- garde 
art from an inter me dial point of view. 
 Aft er Higgins’s ﬁ rst sketch of inter me dia 
it would take another ten years before it 
became a topic of inter na tional discourse 
on art prac tices. In the ﬁ rst half of the 1990s 
some books on inter me di al ity were 
published in Germany. Most of these texts 
dealt with the cros sov ers between liter at ure 
and theatre, but also cinema and visual arts. 
Franz-Josef Albersmeier paid atten tion to 
hybrid genres such as  ciné- roman ,  ciné- 
poème and  ciné- drama . In his critique on 
‘medial one- way traﬃ  c’, emphas iz ing the 
product ive inter ac tions between these 
genres, he hermen eut ic ally analyses cros-
sov ers that in the ﬁ nal analysis converge 
and complete each other ( Albersmeier 
1992 : 81). In  Literatur inter me dial (1995) 
Peter Zima also aims at conver gence and 
comple ment ar ity as a ‘symbi osis’ of words, 
images and sounds. By intro du cing  TV 
Jürgen Müller adds a new element. He 
refers to Higgins in  Intermedialität: Formen 
moderner 
kultureller 
Kommunikation 
(1996), conclud ing that an artistic medium 
is never pure but always already connec ted 
to other media. Conceptualization, co -
oper a tion and commu nic a tion are the 
Habermasian keywords for Müller. Artistic 
state ments are under stood and exper i-
enced within the context of a life- world 
that integ rates the diﬀ er ent exper i ences: 
‘Intermediality does not mean an adding of 
diﬀ er ent medial concepts nor a situ at ing- 
in- between- media of separ ate works, but 
an integ ra tion of aesthetic concepts of 
separ ate media in a new medial context’ 
(1996: 89). 
 In spite of Müller’s dismissal of the in- 
between ness, the tensional aspect of the 
‘inter’ and its recep tion- aesthet ical impact 
come to the fore in one of the contri bu tions 
to Zima’s book. Hubertus von Amelunxen 
elab or ates the exper i ence of the ‘inter’, 
adapt ing categor ies from Barthes’  Camera 
Lucida (1980). Th e emphasis is no longer 
on produc tion, but on an ambigu ous recep-
tion, i.e. the working of the work and its 
exper i en tial eﬀ ects. In Peter Wagner’s  Icons