PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STORIED MATTER

mater ial agen cies mean ing ful exist ence. On 
the contrary, it repres ents a new ecology of 
under stand ing the ulti mate onto logy of a 
mean ing fully artic u late planet. Th e fossils, 
for example, tell stories of extinct beings 
captured in time. Volcanoes tell stories 
about the earth’s turbu lent past. Tree rings 
yield stories of long years of droughts and 
rains, while retreat ing glaciers trans mit 
stories of chan ging ecosys tems and climate, 
blend ing global warming with polit ical 
anxi et ies and social changes. Since narra-
tive agen cies emerge through their inter-
changes with the human reality – such as 
rocks and moun tains with geolo gical 
records reveal ing stories of dynamic 
fusions with animals, plants and humans 
– they all ‘tell us evol u tion ary stories of co- 
exist ence, inter- depend ence . . . extinc tions 
and surviv als’ ( Iovino and Oppermann 
2014b : 7). Th at is why, when we speak of 
‘storied matter’, we are not only using a 
mater ial meta phor, but acknow ledging its 
narrat ive agen cies as active co- authors that 
shape this world and co- determ ine our 
exist ence. Serenella Iovino oﬀ ers a palp-
able example of how this mutual shaping 
of the world unfolds in the narrat ives, 
bodies and land scape of Pompeii: ‘while 
the bodies . . . narrate about an almost 
forgot ten complex ity (the site of the 
ancient Pompeii), the lava . . . narrates 
about the forgot ten orographic struc ture 
of this site, inhab ited by volcanic and 
seismic agen cies, even though it was 
believed to be ‘simply’ a moun tain’ (2016: 
26). Conceived in this way, storied matter 
helps us better under stand fragile ecosys-
tems, polluted land scapes, carbon- ﬁ lled 
atmo sphere, acid i fy ing oceans, chan ging 
climate, retreat ing glaciers, species extinc-
tions and social crises than the scientiﬁ c 
data presen ted in ﬁ gures and numbers. 
Simply because through these stories we 
come to know ‘not only . . . the hidden plots 
and mean ings of a reality, but also . . . 
the oft en unheard voices of this reality’ 
(ibid.: 48), which has today become quite 
disen chanted with cata strophic human 
prac tices. 
 Th inking about storied matter in a 
disen chanted world means think ing seri-
ously about how our invas ive economic 
prac tices produce plan et ary cycles of 
pollu tion, how our polit ical decisions and 
cultural mean ings are enmeshed in their 
produc tion, and how they all enfold into 
one indis sol uble process. Th e mater ial 
stories narrat ive agen cies convey today are 
profoundly troub ling, like the trau matic 
tales of plastic- choked birds on Midway 
Island, and of count less plastic objects that 
compose the infam ous Great Paciﬁ c 
Garbage Patch. Th ey are narrat ive agen cies 
demon strat ing the dire consequences of 
the social and the natural inter pen et rat ing 
each other in the slow death of so many 
marine species. Th ey call for our attent ive-
ness to the stories of destruc tion and 
pollu tion, but at the same time they compel 
us to imagine altern at ive stories of wind or 
water ener gies for a better future. In such 
a case, the narrat ive agen cies of storied 
matter would be the primary authors of 
envir on mental sustain ab il ity and ecolo-
gical sens ib il ity, oﬀ er ing a better image for 
the living world and a better discern ment 
of human–non- human encoun ters. If we 
read the world this way, as storied mater i-
al ity that binds all beings, forces and 
substances with inter con nec ted stories, we 
can answer frequently posed ques tions 
posit ively, such as: can storied matter assist 
us in build ing disan thro po centric prac-
tices in a world facing poten tially cata-
strophic impacts from climate change? 
Can it move human ity into more earth- 
friendly modes of think ing? Can it change 
our energy systems, and help imple ment 
policies of solar, water and wind energy in 
the near future?