PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SENSING PRACTICES

2006a ). With these devel op ments in mind, 
how might it be possible to rethink and 
rework the prac tices, entit ies and envir on-
ments of sense within this broader context 
where the assumed subjects and traject or-
ies of sense are shift  ing? How might these 
expan ded approaches to sensing prac tices 
recast engage ments with exper i ence, while 
recon ﬁ g ur ing explor a tions of prac tice- 
based research ( Citizen Sense 2014–15 )? 
 Rather than take ‘the senses’ as a ﬁ xed 
start ing point, we suggest that sensing- as-
practice allows for an atten tion to these 
diﬀ er ent artic u la tions of sense, partic u larly 
in rela tion to tech no lo gies of envir on-
mental monit or ing, data gathered for evi-
d en tiary claims, the form a tion of citizens, 
and 
more- than-human 
entan gle ments. 
Sensing- as-practice also allows for an 
atten tion to exper i ence that does not 
concen trate exclus ively on a human subject, 
but instead accounts for a vast range of 
sensing subjects, from stones to insects (cf. 
 Whitehead 1929 ). William James, a philo-
sopher who inﬂ u enced Whitehead, suggests 
that a moment of exper i ence ‘prolif er ates 
into the next [moment] through trans itions 
which, whether conjunct ive or disjunct ive, 
continue the exper i en tial tissue’ (1996: 87). 
Sensing prac tices then shift  atten tion to 
form a tions and processes of exper i ence 
across multiple entit ies within partic u lar 
milieus (cf.  Gabrys 2016a ). 
 Such an approach to sensing prac tices 
clearly links this way of organ iz ing and 
under stand ing exper i ence to a posthu man 
perspect ive. Within a posthu man context, 
exper i ence is no longer conﬁ ned solely to 
human points of interest or inquiry. Instead, 
exper i ences of more- than-humans become 
crit ical to rethink ing how sensory rela tions 
form or are excluded, and the subjects – as 
well as new subjects – that concresce 
through these processes ( Whitehead 1929 ; 
cf.  Feminist Posthumanities ; Braidotti 2006). 
But this is not just a project in attempt ing to 
under stand how a myriad of pre- exist ing 
entit ies perform their discrete sensing 
oper a tions. While the speciﬁ city of organ-
isms and entit ies is no doubt import ant, 
sensing prac tices as a concept equally 
emphas izes the point that these are also 
prac tices that are in trans ition, as James 
( 1996 ) suggests, or in process as Whitehead 
( 1929 ) has else where sugges ted. Th e possi-
b il it ies for one partic u lar type of lichen or 
moss to incor por ate and express registers 
of urban air pollu tion in one city could shift  
in rela tion to other organ isms encoun ter-
ing these processes, the city in which the 
entit ies are located, the devel op ment or 
ruin a tion under way, and a whole host of 
other inter con nect ing factors (cf.  Gabrys 
2012a ). 
 By approach ing sensing diﬀ er ently, not 
as the senses or as a human point of medi-
ation, it is possible to begin to account for 
the ways in which sensing prac tices reson-
ate with partic u lar entit ies and rela tions. 
Sensing is not a project of a human mind 
or organs decod ing external substan tial ist 
phenom ena, as Whitehead would suggest, 
but rather could be under stood as the ways 
in which exper i ence is expressed through 
subjects. Yet this is also a collab or at ive 
under tak ing, and so ‘collab or at ive sensing’ 
( Gabrys 2016a ) is always a key aspect of 
sensing prac tices. Far removed from the 
Cartesian brain in a vat, here collab or at ive 
sensing refers to the ways in which shared 
worlds are felt, sustained and even created 
(cf.  TallBear 2011 ). If we were to return to 
the air pollu tion sensor discussed at the 
begin ning of this entry, we would ﬁ nd that 
the initial delin eation of a sensor detect ing 
stimuli and convert ing those stimuli into 
data is a rather linear and limited conﬁ g ur-
a tion of the sensing work that goes on with 
this tech nos cientiﬁ c device. Sensors do not 
merely capture envir on mental data, but 
rather they are involved in collab or at ive 
sensing prac tices for parsing envir on ments