PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEOCYBERNETICS

inform a tion as a commod ity . . . Th is 
inform a tion is oper a tion al iz ing know ledge 
about what the popular is, making it more 
empir ic ally precise, giving it demo graphic 
loca tion, giving it place, situ ation, etc.’ (Hay, 
Hall and Grossberg 2013: 23). 
 While new digital applic a tions consume 
vast amounts of energy and produce  CO 2 
to safe guard digital storage and main ten-
ance, there is also the issue of labour 
outsourcing for the digital assembly lines, 
the role of remote call centres and e- waste, 
the waste disposal of obsol ete tech no lo gies 
in non-Western coun tries (see  Obsolete 
Technologies ) that are harmful and toxic 
because of the metals and chem ic als that, 
once released, lead to long- term illnesses 
and impair ments. Greening the media is 
there fore a plea made by schol ars such as 
Maxwell and Miller in order to unveil the 
envir on mental prac tices and impacts of 
elec tronic media corpor a tions, coun ter ing 
the idea of inform a tion and commu nic a-
tion tech no logy as clean and ecolo gic ally 
benign ( Maxwell and Miller 2012 ). 
 To conclude, even though the term 
‘neoco lo ni al ism’ can become too ﬂ ex ible and 
all- purpose, it still connotes in its essence 
new, unequal distri bu tions of human, ﬁ nan-
cial, envir on mental and cultural resources 
that put coun tries, peoples and subjects into 
posi tions of subal tern ity and protrac ted 
depend ence. 
 See also Anthropocene; Capitalocene and 
Chthulucene; 
Obsolete 
Technologies; 
Planetary. 
 Sandra Ponzanesi 
 NEOCYBERNETICS  
 Developments in cyber net ics and systems 
theory have been prime movers of contem-
por ary posthu man ism. Arriving in the 
mid- twen ti eth century, the metadis cip line 
of cyber net ics gathered physics, math e-
m at ics, biology and engin eer ing into a 
concep tual synthesis freeing research from 
the old Romantic essences of the mech an-
ical and the organic: ‘the oper a tion of the 
living indi vidual and the oper a tion of 
some of the newer commu nic a tion 
machines are precisely paral lel’ ( Wiener 
1950 : 15). Th is is because they may both be 
observed to incor por ate negat ive feed back 
to self- regu late their respect ive oper a tions. 
In its evol u tion to the present moment, 
cyber net ics has also self- incor por ated its 
own feed back, produ cing signi ﬁ c ant philo-
soph ical responses alter ing its original 
tech nos cientiﬁ c premises. Neocybernetics 
denotes this newer line of self- refer en tial 
systems theory and yields a discourse of 
neocy ber netic posthu man ism. 
 Since the 1970s one may distin guish 
between ﬁ rst- order and second- order 
cyber net ics. ‘First- order’ is a back form a tion 
for the original cyber netic logic centred on 
oper a tional circu lar ity in natural and tech-
no lo gical systems (Rosenbleuth, Wiener 
and Bigelow 1943), in which, for instance, 
output eﬀ ects are fed back into causal 
inputs, thus super sed ing a strictly linear 
descrip tion. Nonetheless, ﬁ rst- order cyber-
net ics main tained tradi tional scien ti ﬁ  city in 
its stance of object ive detach ment toward 
the systems it designed and observed. 
‘Second- order’ cyber net ics arose when 
the philo soph ic ally minded cyber net i cist 
Heinz von Foerster forged a ‘cyber net ics of 
cyber net ics’ by turning the logic of oper a-
tional circu lar ity upon itself ( von Foerster 
2003 ). Recursion was now explored in its 
own right as formal self- refer ence in those 
systems capable of rising to cognit ive 
oper a tions, to wit, ‘observing systems’ ( von 
Foerster 1981 ). 
 Living systems came to the fore in this 
descrip tion, followed by social systems. 
Working closely with von Foerster,