PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN CRITICAL THEORY

Methodologically, posthu man crit ical 
theory rejects any form of nostal gia for 
human ism, that is to say the vision of the 
human as the enlightened ‘Man of reason’ 
( Lloyd 1984 ). Both in Deleuze’s philo sophy 
and in femin ist epistem o logy, the non- 
nostal gic approach is cultiv ated through the 
method and the pedago gical tactic of anti- 
oedipal de- famil i ar iz a tion. Th is entails un- 
learn ing old habits of thought, and the 
forms of masculin ist and Eurocentric 
repres ent a tions they sustain. Such a meth-
od o lo gical process goes hand-in-hand with 
the analysis of power rela tions, through the 
carto graphic polit ics of loca tion mentioned 
above. Th e point of carto graph ies is to 
account for and learn to relin quish unearned 
priv ileges and impli cit power priv ileges. Th e 
method of dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion from the famil-
iar is one of the most product ive points 
of contact between neo- mater i al ism and 
femin ist theory ( Braidotti 2016a ). Keeping 
ﬁ rmly in mind the nomadic aim of speak ing 
truth to power and of de- territ ori al iz ing 
philo sophy from the despotic machine that 
has coded it over time, posthu man crit ical 
theory emphas izes the import ance of learn-
ing to think diﬀ er ently about what we are in 
the process of becom ing. 
 Th e meta- meth od o lo gical angle is 
crucial to posthu man crit ical theory 
which, being a prac tical philo sophy, pays 
special atten tion to the criteria needed to 
set up exper i ments with both virtual and 
concrete applic a tions. Th e general concepts 
get oper a tion al ized in a series of meth od o-
lo gical guidelines. Th e ﬁ rst guideline is a 
prac tical, problem- oriented approach to 
philo soph ical think ing, which is open to 
non- human agents and factors, includ ing 
tech no lo gical medi ation. Secondly, we 
need non- linear ity or nomadic think ing 
which entails both putting the creat ive 
powers of the imagin a tion to work and 
the 
strategy 
of 
de- famil i ar iz a tion 
( Braidotti 2013 ). Th irdly, a trans- and 
subjectiv ity actu al ize the virtual possib il it-
ies of a nomadic, rela tional self that func-
tions in a nature–culture continuum and is 
tech no lo gic ally medi ated. Not surpris ingly, 
this non- proﬁ t, exper i mental approach to 
diﬀ er ent prac tices of subjectiv ity runs 
against the spirit of contem por ary capit al-
ism, fuelled by a notion of possess ive indi-
vidu al ism based on quant it at ive options 
( Macpherson 1962 ). Th e theory of posthu-
man subjectiv ity runs precisely in the 
oppos ite direc tion towards non- proﬁ t 
exper i ment a tions with intens ity. 
 As a consequence, the task of crit ical 
thought is deﬁ ned as both crit ical and 
creat ive. Th e  crit ical side is oper a tion al ized 
through carto graph ies of the power 
( potestas ) rela tions at work in the produc-
tion of discourses and social prac tices, 
with special emphasis on their eﬀ ects upon 
subject- form a tion. Th e  creat ive side enlists 
the resources of the imagin a tion and 
proposes a new alli ance of critique with 
creativ ity, philo sophy with the arts, for the 
purpose of learn ing to think diﬀ er ently, 
invent ing new concepts and actu al iz ing 
altern at ives to the domin ant human istic 
vision of the subject. 
 Neo- mater i al ist 
nomadic 
thought 
proposes the paral lel ism of philo sophy, art 
and the sciences, by arguing that think ing 
is the coun ter part of the embod ied subject’s 
ability to enter into multiple modes of rela-
tion. ‘Th ought’ is consequently the expres-
sion of onto lo gical rela tion al ity, that is to 
say of the power ( poten tia ) to aﬀ ect and 
be aﬀ ected ( Deleuze and Guattari 1994 ). 
Furthermore, think ing is about the creation 
of new concepts in that it pursues the actu-
al iz a tion of intens ive or virtual rela tions. 
Posthuman crit ical thought can thus be 
under stood as a multi- direc tional philo-
sophy of rela tional ethics. In other words, 
posthu man crit ical theory fore grounds a 
rela tional ethics of joy and a polit ics of 
aﬃ  rm a tion.