PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MATERIAL FEMINISMS

eﬀ ort ‘to respect and meet well with, even 
extend care to, others while acknow ledging 
that we may not know the other and what 
the best kind of care would be’ (ibid.: 8). 
Th e ethical commit ments of think ing with 
matter do not come from a ‘norm at ive 
moral ity’ ( Puig de la Bellacasa 2010 ); ethics 
here does not comprise inten tional ‘right 
actions’, moral univer sal isms, or an exten-
sion of human ethical programs (e.g. 
human rights) to the non- human world 
( Braidotti 2013 : 190). Because this ethics is 
insep ar able from the onto lo gies and 
epistem o lo gies that condi tion it, it must 
also reject human mastery. We may not 
know who or what the other we encounter 
is, or needs, but forever entangled in these 
rela tions, we must nego ti ate the ethics of 
these meet ings and their collab or at ive 
matter ings. As such, this ethics demands 
that we remain open, attent ive and curious 
towards the other, and what she asks of us. 
Barad calls this an ethics of respons iv ity: it 
is ‘about respons ib il ity and account ab il ity 
for the lively rela tion al it ies of becom ing of 
which we are a part’ ( Barad 2007 : 393). 
 Th is mater ial think ing expands a 
femin ist concep tion of ethics, but it also 
raises the diﬃ   cult ques tion of toward 
whom or what a femin ist ethics should be 
direc ted. Might we join thinkers such Val 
Plumwood, Rosi Braidotti and Claire 
Colebrook in under stand ing ‘a critique of 
masculin ism [as] inter twined with a 
concern for the nonhu man’ ( Colebrook 
2012 : 72)? If the deep struc tures of power 
and oppres sion are a femin ist issue, then 
these concerns do not stop at the human 
subject – or rather, they force a recog ni tion 
of that subject as also a mater ial one, 
embed ded in and as worldly mater i al ity. 
Such an expres sion of care and concern for 
the non- human is not a homo gen ized or 
‘ﬂ at’ ethics; within a femin ist carto graphy 
of power, diﬀ er ence still always matters 
( Braidotti 2013 ). A rela tion ship of  respe cere 
where possib il it ies for change emerge in 
ongoing intra- actions of matters that are 
never completed. Rather than a dilu tion of 
agency as applied to humans, agency in 
femin ist mater i al isms invites us to consider 
how non- human bodies or matters might 
contrib ute to their own actu al iz a tion. 
 Th is recu per a tion of matter’s live li ness 
does not mean that issues of language and 
repres ent a tion are over writ ten, or eﬀ aced. 
Th inking with matter also fore grounds 
 think ing.  Important insights into repres-
ent a tion and discurs ive construc tions are 
not eschewed, but rather them selves under-
stood as entangled in matter’s own express-
ive limits. Self- evident mater i al ity does not 
trump discurs iv ity, any more than onto-
logy would epistem o logy; consid erations 
of matter as agen tial in fact substan tially 
contrib ute to why femin ist mater i al isms 
are not only an onto lo gical but also an 
epistem o lo gical and ethical concern. Such 
epistem o lo gical stakes are high lighted, for 
example, when Barad reminds us that 
‘knowing is a matter of part of the world 
making itself intel li gible to another part’ 
( Barad 2007 : 185). Even if the matters we 
think with inspire us to think in new ways, 
we are never think ing alone. Or, put other-
wise: if we under stand non- human matter 
as agen tial, then we must also give up on 
epistem o lo gical mastery. Material femin-
isms thus draw on femin ist epistem o lo gical 
critiques of total know ledge, reson ant with 
what Donna Haraway has called ‘situ ated 
know ledges’ ( Haraway 1988 ) and Rosi 
Braidotti has called an epistem o lo gical 
posi tion of ‘embed ded ness and embod ied-
ness’ ( Braidotti 2005 ). 
 Still, in the context of these onto- 
epistem o lo gies a ques tion remains: ‘was 
this turn (whatever we want to call it) an 
ethical turn?’ ( Åsberg 2013 : 7). Cecilia 
Åsberg provides an excel lent synop sis of 
the ethics at stake in the new femin ist turn 
to mater i al ity, where this emerges in an