PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GEOPOLITICS

nuclear testing signed in 1963 and the 
attend ant require ment to monitor adher-
ence to it through remote sensing systems 
coin cides with the emer gence of the preﬁ x 
‘geo-’ becom ing synonym ous with the 
earth as globe, as stra tegic ally networked 
and completely surveilled entity. Th e preﬁ x 
‘geo-’ clearly conﬂ ates earth with ground 
and surface. Th e ﬁ rst issue of  Th e Journal of 
GeoElectronics (in 1963) under scores the 
moment the ‘geo-’ becomes codi ﬁ ed as 
primar ily a techno- scientiﬁ c engage ment 
with the earth. Th at ﬁ rst issue included an 
intro duct ory medit a tion on the chan ging 
under stand ing of the preﬁ x ‘geo-’ in rela-
tion to tele- tech no lo gical devel op ments. 
Th e journal is now called  Th e Journal for 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing . 
 Satellites play an integ ral role in many 
large- scale remote sensing systems and 
have helped craft  a ‘geo-’ bereft  of territ ory. 
Th ey metonym ic ally mani fest many of the 
ways that modern techno- scientiﬁ c culture 
in the post Second World War moment 
began to ‘world’ and shape the meta phys ics 
of the imagin ary in terms of what worlds 
could and should be. In the ﬁ rst few para-
graphs of his essay, ‘Th e Age of the World 
Picture’, Heidegger ( 2002 ) argues that 
modern ity’s essence coalesces around a 
series of phenom ena includ ing science’s 
most visible mani fest a tion as machine 
tech no logy, itself using speciﬁ c forms of 
math em at ics to realize its visib il ity and 
power. Th is situ ation aligns modern 
science with modern meta phys ics. Further 
he argues that within the very late modern-
ity of the middle part of the twen ti eth 
century, art moves into the world of 
aesthet ics and thus becomes a means for 
simul tan eously creat ing and artic u lat ing 
human exper i ence. All of this culmin ates 
in human action being under stood as 
culture, which then means that culture 
artic u lates the highest of human achieve-
ment and care, with care being conver ted 
into ‘the polit ics of culture’. Heidegger 
brings math em at ics, science, machine 
tech no logy, art, aesthet ics, culture and 
meta phys ics together in a penet rat ing view 
of the legacies of twentieth- century traject-
or ies that further lead to an elision of 
human culture as a primary driving force 
of geopol it ical concep tu al iz a tion. 
 Th e cultural geopol it ics of Heidegger’s 
inter pret a tion of modern ity’s gener ated 
meta phys ics can be charted in the capa city 
for repres ent a tion to equate with exper i-
ence and the real, for the map to create the 
territ ory and the tech no lo gical means for 
carto graphic repres ent a tion to become the 
tools for human ‘world ing’. Peter Sloterdijk’s 
expans ive medit a tion on spheres and the 
meta phys ical lineage of the globe as 
human goal and achieve ment argues post-
Heidegger that ‘at no time, however – not 
even in the age of space travel – could the 
enter prise of visu al iz ing the earth deny its 
semi- meta phys ical quality. Anyone who 
wished to attempt a portrait of the whole 
earth aft er the down fall of heaven stood, 
know ingly or not, in the tradi tion of 
ancient occi dental meta phys ical cosmo-
graphy’ (2014: 774). 
 Benjamin Bratton in   Th e Stack: Soft ware 
and Sovereignty (2016), contra Sloterdijk, 
‘devel ops a new model of polit ical 
geography and systems design for the early 
era of plan et ary- scale compu ta tion’ that 
steps beyond this occi dental meta phys ical 
cosmo graphy. Bratton links infra struc ture 
at many mater ial and percep tual scales to 
examine multi- layered struc tures of soft -
ware, hard ware and network ‘stacks’ that 
operate inde pend ently and inter de pend-
ently at modular levels. Using the logic 
of plat forms, he outlines ‘an altern at ive sub-
 di vi sion of polit ical geograph ies at work 
now and in the future’ that lead from 
the supposed ‘eclipse of the nation- state to 
the ascend ance of polit ical theo logy as 
an exist en tial transna tion al ism, from the