PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMANIST PERFORMATIVITY

ated only by scientiﬁ c know ledge in its 
multiple repres ent a tional forms. Th is 
model is so entrenched within Western 
culture that it has taken on a common- 
sense appeal. And with it, the inert ness of 
nature as a time less and ahis tor ical entity 
await ing/invit ing repres ent a tion goes now 
mostly undebated ( Barad 2003 ). 
 Th e taken- for-granted onto lo gical gap 
between words and things upon which 
modern Western science rests has gener-
ated ques tions around the accur acy of 
repres ent a tions, espe cially among femin ist, 
post struc tur al ist, post co lo nial critics and 
queer theor ists ( Butler 1993 ;  Foucault 
1973 ,  1972 ,  1977 ,  1980 ;  Haraway 1991 , 
 1992a ,  1997 ;  Latour 1991 ). Th eir search 
for altern at ives to the static rela tion al ity 
model proposed by repres ent a tion al ism 
has brought forward perform at ive under-
stand ings of the nature of scientiﬁ c prac-
tices that shift  the focus from linguistic 
repres ent a tions to discurs ive prac tices, i.e. 
from ques tions of corres pond ence between 
descrip tions and reality to matters of 
prac tice/doings/actions. 
 Michel Foucault was the ﬁ rst to theor ize 
discurs ive prac tices as the local sociohis tor-
ical mater ial condi tions that enable and 
constrain discip lin ary know ledge prac tices, 
and produce – rather than merely describe 
– the ‘subjects’ and ‘objects’ of know ledge 
prac tices. More recently, queer theor ist 
Judith Butler ( 1993 ) drew on Foucault’s 
sugges tion that the repe ti tion of regu lat ory 
bodily prac tices produces a speciﬁ ed mater-
i al iz a tion of the body to link her notion of 
gender perform ativ ity to the mater i al iz a-
tion of sexed bodies. As a result of these and 
other eﬀ orts towards a perform at ive under-
stand ing of iden tity, matter loses its tradi-
tional connota tion as passive blank slate of 
culture to emerge as ‘a process of mater i al iz-
a tion that stabil izes over time to produce 
the eﬀ ect of bound ary, ﬁ xity, and surface we 
call matter’ ( Butler 1993 : 9). 
thought, this constitutively para dox ical 
form of reason, is in fact a hall mark of 
modern iz a tion and of modern ity itself, 
under stood as a process of ‘func tional 
diﬀ er en ti ation’ of society into discrete 
autopoi etic social systems, each with its 
own govern ing codes of know ledge and 
commu nic a tion (what is some times called, 
more moral ist ic ally, ‘frag ment a tion’ or 
‘special iz a tion’), each strug gling to manage 
and reduce the increas ing complex ity of a 
larger envir on ment that they them selves 
help to produce, in fact, in deploy ing their 
own special ized discourses. From this 
vantage, the contin gency of the various 
codes and ‘maps’ that we use to make sense 
of the world around us is in fact a reser voir 
of the very complex ity those codes and 
maps attempt to reduce. Posthumanist 
thought, in this sense, is both an index and 
an agent of complex ity. 
 See also Anthropism/Immanent Humanism; 
Posthuman 
Critical 
Th eory; 
Critical 
Posthumanism; Insurgent Posthumanism; 
Ontological Turn. 
 Cary Wolfe 
 POSTHUMANIST