PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TERRESTRIAL

are the rabbits so sad?’ or ‘How did you get 
the elephants to group up and walk 
together in one direc tion?’ Th e answer is 
that the artist has done nothing special. 
Th ey are just moving in a very simple and 
auto mated pattern. 
 What does it say about us, Cartesians, 
when we react so strongly and emotion ally 
to these plastic shapes that so obvi ously 
move with the help of small servos and 
batter ies? What does this say about our 
mech an ical reac tions  and actions? And 
why do we, so easily, attrib ute ‘a life’ to a set 
of cogwheels? Rather than defend ing or 
critiquing the Animal-Machine hypo-
thesis, exper i ences like these play with our 
passions and most convin cingly realize the 
crisis (ecolo gical, digital, but then also 
capit al ist) that make up our every day lives 
today. Th ey enact these crises and their 
consequences best, compel ling us to 
rethink the same ques tion over and over 
again: ‘What happened . . .?’ 
 See also  Animal; Art; Occupy (aft er Deleuze); 
Postanimalism  
 Note  
 1.  Réponse de M. Descartes a M. Morus. 
1649.  Œuevres, tome x. p.  204. ‘Mais le 
plus grand de tous les préjugés que nous 
ayons retenus de notre enfance, est celui 
de croire que les bêtes pensent,’ etc. 
 Rick Dolphijn and Tove Kjellmark  
 TERRESTRIAL  
 As a noun, terrestrial makes its ﬁ rst appear-
ance in English in 1602, in Shakespeare’s 
comedy  Th e Merry Wives of Windsor . In 
the play, it refers to a mortal, a layman, a 
human being ( Oxford English Dictionary ) 
and it is coupled by way of oppos i tion to 
celes tial beings. In similar fashion, previ-
ous adjectival uses of the word, for example 
in Tyndale’s 1525 English trans la tion of 
the Bible, had intro duced terrestrial as a 
refer ence to the earthly sphere, again in 
oppos i tion to the celes tial sphere. Terres-
trial is – both as noun and adject ive – that 
which pertains to the earth and the soil, to 
mater ial instead of ether eal life. 
 Th ree planes present them selves to us in 
view of this term: terrestrial as tool to think 
human exist ence eman cip ated from a divine 
order; terrestrial as tied to earth in view of 
the imman ent realm of plan et ary exist ence; 
and terrestrial in the sf- mode as envi sion ing 
terran exist ences – as earthly crit ters, and 
thereby disrupt ing the struc tural vertic al ity 
of heaven and earth and the anthro po-
centric fantas ies of extra ter restri al ism. 
 First plane: terrestrial as tool to think 
human exist ence eman cip ated from a 
divine order. Derived from the Latin  terra 
(whose Greek precursor and equi val ent is 
 gaia ), the rising usage of terrestrial in the 
Renaissance – of which the stress of Dante’s 
 Divine Comedy (1305–21) on the pilgrim’s 
worldly journey is one early example – is 
not surpris ing. Th e earthly exist ence of 
the human animal was of growing concern 
to 
Renaissance 
human ism, 
reach ing 
from Dante, Erasmus and Bruno, via 
Shakespeare’s dramatic anatom ies of the 
human to Vico’s birth of the new sciences, 
whereby the internal, espe cially gendered 
and racial ized divi sions and exclu sions 
within the category of the ‘human’ were 
crucial to this ﬁ rst- wave human ist concep-
tion of ‘Man’ ( Wynter 2003 ; also  Bourke 
2011 ). As Erich Auerbach’s study  Dante als 
Dichter der irdis chen Welt (1929) argued – 
and Edward Said was to follow Auerbach in 
this ( Said 2003 ) – Dante was an early  Poet 
of the Secular World , as the English trans la-
tion renders the title of Auerbach’s study. 
Emily Apter has noted that this trans la tion 
is not entirely fortu nate (2006: 69), as it was