PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FEMINICITY

VNS Matrix’s  Cyberfeminist Manifesto for 
the 21st Century  (1991) included multi- 
media art works that func tion as active- 
points that comic ally berate and agitate the 
patri archal algorithms of the new domains 
of tech no logy in the 1990s. Sadie Plant’s 
 Zeros and Ones: Digital Women and the 
New Technoculture  (1997) oﬀ ers more 
utopic forms of Feminicity than  VNS  
Matrix, and both of these active- points in 
their respect ive works celeb rate the joining 
of the digital with the femin ist as a posit ive 
reclam a tion of masculin ist discourses of 
tech no logy. 
 Donna Haraway’s text,  A Cyborg 
Manifesto (1985–1991), iden ti ﬁ es the 
epistem o lo gical signi ﬁ c ance of the shift  
into bio- tech no lo gical frame works for 
under stand ing the diﬀ er ent forms of polit-
ical real it ies that is produced in the digital 
merger of machine and sentient subject. 
Th e system of governance of the Industrial 
Revolution over its machine- man changed 
through the histor ical junc ture of the 
digital revolu tion. Signiﬁ cantly, Haraway 
describes this change in terms of the cybor-
gian personae as ‘not subject to Foucault’s 
biopol it ics’ but rather, it ‘stim u lates polit ics, 
a much more potent ﬁ eld of oper a tions’ 
( Haraway 1991 : 163). Haraway uses the 
concept of this cyborg (a neolo gism 
produced through polit ical consid er a tions 
of the ﬁ eld of cyber net ics) to express a 
‘disas sembled and reas sembled’ self, which 
femin ists must ‘code’ under the late capit al-
ist system of an ‘inform at ics of domin a tion’ 
( Haraway 1991 : 163). Haraway’s cyborg is a 
ﬂ ex ible active- point for Feminicity; stim u-
lat ing in a func tional way, and product ive 
of new femin ist forms for think ing and 
coding femin ist oper a tions, through the 
expans ive ness of its conﬁ g ur a tion which 
works to arouse new polit ical desires. As a 
spec u lat ive concept, Haraway’s cyborg 
proposes a number of utopic as well as 
prob able ideas for radical changes in think-
ing iden tity polit ics that defy racial or 
anatom ic ally given posi tions gener at ive of 
aﬃ  rm at ive modes of under stand ing life in 
terms of diﬀ er ent species, and their poten-
tial in terms of the exper i ence of a range of 
biopol it ical posi tions and the possib il it ies 
for new forms of collect ive communit ies. 
 Haraway’s cyborg as an exem plar of 
Feminicity enabled count less other active- 
points where the notion of a digital gender, 
and/or digital femin ism, to concep tu al ize, 
spec u late upon and produce new forms. 
Th ese are expressed under a range of names, 
includ ing 
Technofeminism 
( Wajcman 
2004 ), Cyberfeminism ( Cornelia Sollfrank 
1998 ) 
and 
Xenofeminism 
( Laboria 
Cuboniks collect ive 2015 ). Artist Juliana 
Huxtable’s perform ance  Th ere Are Certain 
Facts that Cannot Be Disputed (2015) frames 
the research ques tions of many prac ti tion ers 
of the ﬁ rst decades of Feminicity, where 
visual symbols still govern racial ized and 
gendered norm at ive beha viours. 
 Within a func tional digital envir on-
ment, new tools for expres sion and artic u la-
tion of femin ist posi tions are enabled. While 
global digital markets currently come under 
diﬀ er ent regu la tions and legis la tion (for 
example the  DSM (Digital Single Market) 
model adopted by the European Union in 
2016), common global inform at ics points 
enabled a relat ively free distri bu tion of 
active- points (the dissem in ated content of 
which may have consequences for the 
maker/user of the mater ial). Th e YouTube 
digital broad cast channel, launched in 2005, 
for example, gave the femin ist collect ive 
Pussy Riot the plat form by which it could 
glob ally distrib ute ‘A Punk Prayer’ (2012), a 
potent active- point of Feminicity, that 
redir ec ted the media commons atten tion to 
a range of breaches of human rights issues, 
made by norm at ive patri archal forms of 
reli gious and gender repress ive systems. 
Th e Twitter social media plat form (2006) 
enables a satur a tion of femin ist content,