PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NECROPOLITICS

power to ‘let live and make die’ by a 
singu lar sover eign over the hier arch ic ally 
organ ized people. As Foucault put it, this 
new govern ment al ity brought into being 
a modern ized notion of the social body 
and of the subjects that embod ied it. Bio- 
polit ics exerts social and polit ical power 
over a new type of social body: 
 not exactly society . . . nor is it the indi-
vidual- as-body. It is a new body, a multiple 
body, a body with so many heads that, 
while they might not be inﬁ n ite in 
number, cannot neces sar ily be counted. 
Biopolitics deals with the popu la tion, 
with the popu la tion as a social problem, 
as a problem that is at once scientiﬁ c and 
polit ical, as a biolo gical problem and as 
power’s problem. 
 Foucault 2003 : 245 
 Th is popu la tion as the target of bio- 
political manage ment includes human and 
non- human agents, which in turn require 
modes of governance that combine the 
produc tion of know ledge, the gath er ing of 
inform a tion and the inven tion and imple-
ment a tion of updated forms of monit or ing 
and control. It is a mixed polit ical economy 
where discourse and/as power produces a 
new type of social subject: the informed 
and willing citizen who self- imple ments 
the basic rules of law. 
 Now more than three decades aft er this 
insight ful analysis, it remains ‘urgent to 
assess the state of the theor et ical debates 
on bio- power aft er Foucault, espe cially in 
terms of its legal, polit ical and ethical 
implic a tions’ ( Braidotti 2007 ). In a post co-
lo nial, neo- imper ial, neolib eral era in 
which tech no lo gies of destruc tion are not 
only more ubiquit ous but are also more 
tactile ( Mbembe 2003 : 34), how to account 
for death and dying? Here, Achille 
Mbembe oﬀ ers a supple ment or correct ive 
to Foucauldian notions of biopol it ics in 
asking: 
 Is the notion of biopower suﬃ   cient to 
account for the contem por ary ways in 
which the polit ical, under the guise of 
war, of resist ance, or of the ﬁ ght against 
terror, makes the murder of the enemy its 
primary and abso lute object ive? . . . What 
place is given to life, death, and the human 
body (in partic u lar the wounded or slain 
body)? How are they inscribed in the 
order of power? 
 Mbembe 2003 : 12 
 Life and death can, of course, not be separ-
ated and Foucault is the ﬁ rst to recog nize it, 
going so far as to coin the term ‘thanatos- 
polit ics’. In contem por ary crit ical theory, 
biopol it ics and necro pol it ics are not oppos-
ites but rather two sides of the same coin 
( Braidotti 2007 ;  Mbembe 2003 ). Th ey func-
tion like bifocal lenses that allow us to 
analyse power rela tions and examine the 
inex tric able polit ics of life and death. 
Moving away from Foucault, necro pol it ics 
as a theor et ical paradigm of analysis is 
concerned with how life is subjug ated to the 
power of death ( Mbembe 2003 : 39). It asks 
who gets to live and who must die (or who 
must live and who is let die), in the contem-
por ary polit ical economy, thereby putting 
forth a diﬀ er ent hypo thesis from clas sical 
bio- power. Necropolitics uncov ers the 
mech an isms 
whereby 
certain 
bodies 
nowadays are ‘cultiv ated’ or grown for the 
purpose of enhan cing life and (re)produc-
tion, while others are marked for or 
neglected into death. Th is shift  of prior it ies 
constructs a new polit ical economy based 
on constantly shift  ing bound ar ies between 
‘legit im ate’ subjects, indexed on life, and ‘ille-
git im ate’ non- subjects, indexed on death. 
 Mbembe developed the concept of 
necro pol it ics to account for contem por ary 
warfare and the various ways in which 
‘weapons are deployed in the interest of 
maximum destruc tion of persons and the 
creat ing of  death- worlds , new and unique 
forms of social exist ence in which vast