PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTGLACIAL

swirl ing east ward and upward. Th e warm 
streams plunge Northern Europe into mild 
winters. Reaching the Arctic Sea, the dense 
salty water sinks to the deep- ocean ﬂ oor 
where it ﬂ ows back to trop ical regions. Th is 
process anim ates the global Ocean streams. 
Circulation is dense in the submar ine 
rivers, and thick with nutri ents. 
 Th e massive inﬂ ux of arctic melt water 
dilutes the salin ity and impedes the sink to 
the Sea ﬂ oor. First, the Ocean streams will 
slow down before they stop alto gether. Will 
England’s climate resemble Labrador’s? 
Th ere is ques tion ing in the water. 
 (2) Widely dispersed loca tions ﬁ lmed on 
the Shetland Islands, Greenland’s Disco 
Bay and a tiny Caribbean Island are 
connec ted through the invis ible Ocean 
streams, which determ ine the temper a -
t ures in the North Atlantic, sea and land. 
Th e magnitude and sens it ive correl a tion 
of these plan et ary processes are hard to 
grasp, all the more so as the most signi ﬁ c-
ant processes are occur ring between 
loca tions and invis ible to our eyes. Th ey 
refer ence what Timothy Morton calls 
hyper ob jects – very large diﬀ used objects 
that are perman ently present but not 
local ized in a mater ial sense (global 
warming, ﬁ nan cial markets). Since hyper-
ob jects occur in much vaster tempor al it-
ies, they phase in and out of the shorter 
human time frame of percep tion and 
with draw from our visib il ity. Th ey only 
exist in unpresent able dimen sions, both 
math em at ic ally and alleg or ic ally. And yet 
they urgently need to enter the collect ive 
imagin ary. Th e imagin ary capa city is 
exper i en cing a signi ﬁ c ant expan sion in 
posthu man ism. Along those lines, the 
she- scient ist’s exam in a tion is direc ted not 
only to the phys ical world and atmo-
sphere that is engulﬁ ng her, but also to the 
thoughts that are formed, recon ﬁ gured or 
released under the chan ging condi tions. 
Excursions into the fold of these entangled 
land scapes produces a crit ical loca tion 
that puts thought and imagin a tion in 
move ment. 
Ideas rush by like weather events . 
Subatlantic, Ursula Biemann, 2015, video still