PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
WEARABLE TECHNOLOGY

sensorial bound ar ies, wear able tech no lo-
gies enable the body to perform iden tity in 
and through smart clothes. 
 Today, a number of design ers exper i-
ment with the ways in which bodies can be 
shaped or iden tit ies performed beyond 
our wildest dreams, for example Hussein 
Chalayan, Iris van Herpen, Pauline van 
Dongen, Anouk Wipprecht, CuteCircuit, 
Suzanne Lee, Olek, Helen Storey, etc. Th ey 
seem to have taken Haraway’s plea to heart; 
an appeal ‘for  pleas ure in the confu sion of 
bound ar ies’ (1991 [1985]: 150; original 
emphasis). Th eir futur istic designs blur the 
bound ar ies between art, fashion, science 
and tech no logy. Th ey not only share a 
sculp tural, tech no lo gical and artis anal 
approach to clothes, but also a fascin a tion 
for stretch ing the form and shape of the 
human body and playing with human 
iden tity. 
 Recent studies in the ﬁ eld of wear able 
tech no logy provide an over view of tech-
niques and applic a tions ( Mattila 2006 ;  Cho 
2010 ), or summar ize its devel op ments and 
actors ( Quinn 2002 ,  2010 ;  Seymour 2009 , 
 2010 ), but, to date, few studies crit ic ally 
reﬂ ect on the socio- cultural dimen sions 
of wear able tech no logy (Toussaint and 
 Smelik 2017 ). Rather than giving an over-
view of what is possible in wear able tech-
no logy, I there fore prefer to draw out some 
prin cipal char ac ter ist ics that are relev ant 
for the posthu man: the emphasis on craft s-
man ship, the import ance of mater i al ity 
and embod i ment, and the inter play of 
iden tity. 
 Fashion design ers of wear able tech no-
logy share an intense love for craft s man-
ship and a hands- on engage ment with the 
mater i al ity of textiles and textures ( Smelik 
2017 ). Th e renewed focus on craft s man ship 
is closely connec ted to the tech no lo gical 
world we live in. As Richard Sennett writes, 
‘tech nical under stand ing devel ops through 
the powers of imagin a tion’ (2008: 10). Th e 
artis anal qual it ies that are imbibed in 
craft s man ship bring the tech no lo gies 
within the grip of our hands, making the 
high- tech world more human and access-
ible. Where for Sennett it seems to be 
impossible or utopian for craft s men to 
work with the machines product ively (ibid.: 
118), fashion design ers are keen to combine 
craft s man ship with tech no logy; it is not a 
ques tion of one exclud ing the other – they 
go hand in hand. Th is refers back to the 
original Greek meaning of the word  techne : 
art, skill, craft . Th e focus on craft s man ship 
betrays a new interest in the mater i al ity of 
matter in a high- tech world of virtual tech-
no lo gies ( Barrett and Bolt 2012 ). While 
fashion design ers focus ﬁ rst and fore most 
on the mater i al ity of textiles, and of the 
tech no lo gies involved, they are also inter-
ested in the mater i al ity of the human skin 
and body ( Rocamora and Smelik 2016 ). 
Moreover, they extend their fascin a tion for 
matter and mater i al ity to the tech no lo gies 
that they use; they have developed what 
Sennett calls a ‘mater ial conscious ness’ 
(2008: 119). 
 Th e issue of mater i al ity is para mount 
here, because matter is precari ous in an age 
of digital and virtual tech no lo gies ( Bennett 
and Joyce 2010 ;  Coole and Frost 2010 ). Th e 
notion of mater i al ity allows a focus on the 
actual matter of tech no logy and how – 
mater ial – bodies relate, oft en intim ately, to 
the tech nical objects that enhance clothes 
and also the iden tit ies of the wearer. Th ere 
is no doubt that tech no lo gical innov a tions 
will have a deep impact on the meaning 
and commu nic a tion of clothes and fashion. 
If tech no lo gic ally enhanced clothes can 
measure temper at ures, chem ical processes 
or vital func tions, sense move ment and 
posi tion, or have express ive qual it ies, they 
will change the rela tion of the wearers 
to them selves as well as trans form the 
commu nic a tion to and with others. 
Th e fact that the garments are worn on