PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY

(UN)DOCUMENTED CITIZENSHIP 
shows how the non- citizen, Arendt’s 
‘savages’ or Agamben’s ‘homo sacer’, those 
who are oft en asso ci ated with a posi tion of 
ulti mate margin al iz a tion, act from a 
margin al ized posi tion. It is a good start ing 
point for a discus sion of the value of undoc-
u mented citizen ship. Whereas citizen ship 
and docu ment a tion, in the sense of pass-
ports, resid ence permits or oﬃ   cial recog ni-
tion of the right kind of refugee, seem to be 
inher ently connec ted, when we see citizen-
ship as a dynamic prac tice, it becomes 
possible to see citizen ship enacted by those 
without docu ment a tion. 
 All over Europe activ ism of undoc u-
mented migrants is taking place. To take a 
number of Western European examples: 
between 2008 and 2010 France witnessed a 
series of strikes of undoc u mented workers. 
Almost 7,000 workers occu pied compan ies 
and temp agen cies ( Kahmann 2015 ). Th is 
form of activ ism is not only an act that 
tries to reject margin al iz a tion, it is also 
an aﬃ  rm a tion of the construct ive civic 
pres ence of  sans- papiers (liter ally: ‘those 
without docu ment a tion’) in French society. 
Th e strike showed to what extent the 
French economy counts on undoc u mented 
workers. Th e name that was claimed by the 
activ ists was not ‘ sans papiers ’, but rather 
‘ ouvri ers sans papiers ’ (‘workers without 
papers’). Th ere is no ﬁ gure of the human it-
arian victim here, nor is there only the 
grasp of power, rather what was shown by 
the strike of undoc u mented French citizens 
is that undoc u mented migrants are 
margin al ized yet active and constitutive 
parts of society and hence can engage in 
acts of citizen ship. 
 Similarly, the Netherlands has known a 
protest move ment that uses the slogan ‘We 
Are Here’. Th e slogan is simple yet eﬀ ect ive: 
undoc u mented 
migrants 
have 
been 
making a life for them selves, oft en under 
extremely taxing circum stances, in the 
midst of Dutch civil iz a tion. Th e move ment 
this grim diagnosis is increas ingly unten-
able. Th ere is an urgent need to not just 
critique but also to change inhu mane situ-
ations around the borders of Europe. 
Emphasizing that any concep tu al iz a tion of 
the human is inher ently bound up with 
domin a tion and biopower para dox ic ally 
runs the risk of enfor cing rather than 
critiquing the power less ness of those who 
are most victim ized ( Lemke 2005 ). In the 
face of the plight of refugees both at the 
borders and within nation- states, this 
stance is woefully insuﬃ    cient. 
 Increasingly, schol ars argue that, contra 
pess im ist diagnoses as outlined above, citi-
zen ship can be the site of micro- resist ance 
(Papastergiadis 2006), and a rehu man iz a-
tion of those who are excluded ( Zembylas 
2010 ). In his  Acts of Citizenship , Engin Isin 
has formu lated an altern at ive concep tu al iz-
a tion of civic agency which is illus trat ive of 
this trend in crit ical theory: ‘we deﬁ ne acts 
of citizen ship as those acts that trans form 
forms (orient a tions, strategies, tech no lo-
gies) and modes (citizens, strangers, out-
siders, aliens) of being polit ical by bring ing 
into being new actors as activ ist citizens 
(claimants of rights and respons ib il it ies) 
through creat ing new sites and scales of 
struggle’ ( Isin and Nielsen 2008 ). 
 Deﬁ ning polit ics not as a play of actors 
with precon ceived notions, but instead as 
processes that expand the polit ical sphere, 
claimant of rights and respons ib il it ies, 
citizen ship is seen here not as a stable 
category, nor as an iden ti ﬁ c a tion which is 
completely at the hands of empire, but 
rather as a dynamic prac tice. Citizenship 
in Isin’s sense is claimed by those actors 
who claim rights and respons ib il it ies and 
those who create new sites and scales of 
struggles. Isin’s concep tu al iz a tion opens up 
civic agency to those who are usually not 
seen as claimants of it. 
 Th e activ ism of undoc u mented migrants 
them selves oﬀ ers a good start ing point. It