PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FOOD

Some of the most thor ough concep tu al-
iz a tions of the mater i al ity of human bodies 
appear long before these modern micro-
scopic insights, in the death poetry of 
medi eval Christian Europe, which revelled 
in the decom pos i tion, and hence the edi -
b il ity, of human bodies. A work like the 
ﬁ ft eenth- century ‘Disputation between the 
Body and Worms’, for example, pictures a 
crowd of worms insist ing to a complain ing 
corpse that she has always been food for 
others: bedbugs, lice, and now, in the grave, 
maggots. It is not acci dental that this poem, 
preserved in a docu ment produced by an 
unusu ally severe male monas tery, makes 
its belea guered corpse a once beau ti ful, 
wealthy woman. Its celib ate male readers 
would be led to recog nize their own edib il-
ity, while simul tan eously delight ing in the 
humi li ation of a ﬂ eshy vanity that they 
disdained as partic u larly femin ine. And 
they them selves imagined that they would 
be resur rec ted into perfec ted, unchan ging 
bodies, freed of the neces sity of eating or 
the humi li ations of excre tion. Left  behind 
is the pullu lat ing body of this woman, like 
so many other disdained bodies, treated as 
food. 
 Th is poem is evid ence that only a few 
humans have tended to be granted the 
full protec tions of human mastery. Th e 
Christians of late medi eval England told 
stories about the descent of Jews from pigs, 
one of the few domestic animals raised 
only for meat; crusade ﬁ ctions imagined 
captured Muslim soldiers butchered and 
fed either to each other or to their captors; 
eight eenth- century accounts of mari time 
canni bal ism attest that white sailors were 
rarely the ﬁ rst sacri ﬁ ced to stave oﬀ  their 
ship mates’ star va tion; and what oft en 
distin guishes the heroes of post- collapse 
ﬁ ction like  Th e Road or  World War Z from 
the swarms of eaters and eaten is their 
being, with few excep tions, well- armed, 
able- bodied white men. 
 Posthuman prac tices must counter the 
idea of the ‘uneaten eater’ by requir ing a 
recog ni tion of the shared imman ence of at 
least our bodies and their enabling, uneven 
inter de pend en cies. A posthu man ethics of 
food would replace the concept of the ‘food 
pyramid’ with a ‘food chain’ or, better yet, a 
food web. Th is would not aim to render us 
as ethic ally irrel ev ant as many of us tend to 
assume our food to be, but would rather 
dispel the inter woven illu sions of inno cent 
eating, mater ial inde pend ence and personal 
tran scend ence. Patterns of consump tion 
are never one- to-one (as with a chain), as 
anything that continu ally relies on the 
consump tion of a host of others, and is 
subject in turn to other, uncount able 
appet ites. Nor can eating, enacted as it is 
amid the continual ﬂ ux of beings, ever be a 
closed loop. Eating is open- ended. 
 Several contem por ary artistic prac tices 
centre on foster ing this recog ni tion. Jae 
Rhim Lee’s  Inﬁ nity Burial Suit  is crocheted 
with a rhizo matic pattern infused with 
mush room spores, that when combined 
with mineral and fungal reagents both 
helps the body decom pose and captures 
the envir on mental toxins that we ingest 
while alive (‘Th e Inﬁ nity Burial’). Elaine 
Tin Nyo is currently engaged in a ‘Little 
Piggy’ project: she is raising ﬁ ve piglets, 
whose lives will end in an abat toir, 
whereupon Tin Nyo will render them into 
sausage. She has paired this project with 
one she plans to realize decades from now, 
when she meets her own (natural) death, 
by having herself also trans formed into 
sausage ( Moy 2014 ). A still more chal len-
ging posthu man food prac tice, neither 
await ing death nor relying on directly 
killing animals, is recor ded in Alex Branch’s 
2011 video  Nothing Left  to Take Away . 
Branch stands on a parking lot hillock of 
snow, amid a swarm of seagulls, feeding 
them bread, until, empty handed, she 
collapses to let the gulls peck frantic ally