PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PROCESS ONTOLOGIES

ively) stable center of agency’ (2000: 15). In 
Rescher’s onto logy, the indi vidual human 
conscious ness, soul, iden tity, mind and 
body disap pear as inde pend ent entit ies in 
favour of exten ded processes. 
 Simple obser va tions allow us to under-
stand the extent and vari ab il ity of relat ive 
stabil ity as megapro cess in process onto lo-
gies. Take the air as it sustains you with 
oxygen, yet also intro duces harmful 
pollut ants; the much- ﬁ ltered water you 
drink; the ambient temper at ure keeping 
you alive; the clothes made thou sands 
of miles away; the language you use, 
developed by the speech of millions over 
thou sands of years; the microbes in your 
gut keeping you healthy; the tech no lo gies 
of glass, silicon, threads, manage ment, 
distri bu tion, drugs and pros thet ics. All 
are vital aspects of a relat ively stable mega-
pro cess which extends your illus ory human 
bound ar ies of body, mind, char ac ter and 
soul. You are dissolved into the multi pli-
city of the non- human, just as those non- 
human processes reach out and dissolve 
into you. 
 See 
also 
Commutation 
Ontology; 
Econtology; Metastability; Ontological 
Turn; Vibrant Matter. 
 James Williams   
for them. Process onto lo gies can be very 
close to the ethics and polit ics of some 
kinds of human ism, where posit ive values 
are asso ci ated with some qual it ies exhib-
ited by actual humans as they extend into 
the world. Th is idea of exten sion draws 
process onto logy close to theor ies in the 
philo sophy of mind drawing vari ously on 
Clark, Varela and Th ompson and describe 
mind as exten ded, embed ded, embod ied 
and enacted. 
 Th e human ism of the great poet, 
engaged 
polit ical 
activ ist, 
commit ted 
reformer and invest ig ator into human kind 
are not closed oﬀ  from process onto logy. 
Yet process onto logy will also remove the 
illus ory basis for a strong human ism, 
where the commonly deﬁ ned and repres-
en ted abstract human being is the general 
found a tion for exclus ive and bounded 
values. Process onto logy can lead to a prag-
matic anthro po centrism, though it will 
always be opposed to an ideal ist human ism 
and sens it ive to shared processes with 
animals, plants and tech no logy. 
 When reﬂ ect ing on process onto logy, 
Nicholas Rescher, whose work combines 
American prag mat ism and process philo-
sophy, explains why the ground of strong 
human ism is taken away: ‘Based on a 
process- oriented approach, the self or ego 
. . . is simply a megapro cess – a struc tured 
system of processes, a cohes ive and (relat-