PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MEDIANATURES

either but embed ded in the cultural under-
stand ing of life. Th is is not to say that 
nature – to use the short hand to refer to 
the biosphere, hydro sphere, geosphere and 
also atmo sphere – is merely a repres ent a-
tion or deﬁ ned by cultural mean ings. It is 
just to point out that the nature and 
animals have been under stood and oper a-
tion al ized as a resource (as Martin 
Heidegger and others argued, includ ing 
 Braidotti 2006a : 98) and by way of tech-
nos cientiﬁ c frame works that deﬁ ne it 
through its chem istry and other sorts of 
analyt ics. Th is does not exhaust the intens-
ity of nature as a living form a tion ( Braidotti 
2006a ;  Parikka 2014 ) but it does for sure 
force us to consider it as part of a feed back 
loop that involves much more than just 
nature. Hence to talk of medi anatures, a 
term that is a useful neolo gism, is a way to 
try to grasp the intens ive co- determ in a tion 
and co- emer gence of the two spheres of 
natural dynam ics and media cultural 
epistem o lo gies, of the onto- epistem o lo gical 
situ ation that deﬁ nes our tech nical 
modern ity. Media are in and of nature in 
ways that expand any talk of the envir on-
ment into a virtual ecology of ‘social, polit-
ical, ethical and aesthetic dimen sions’ 
( Braidotti 2006a : 123; see also  Guattari 
2000  and  Fuller 2005 ). 
 Medianatures is a concept that owes its 
exist ence to Donna Haraway’s notion of 
nature cul tures. Naturecultures is a key 
term that features in many of Haraway’s 
examples and discus sions of compan ion 
species. It is a concept that troubles separ a-
tions of nature from culture, and in general 
addresses the prob lem atic categor ies by 
way of the microint er ac tions that deﬁ ne 
for example animal–human rela tions. 
Hence, 
when 
address ing 
compan ion 
species, Haraway speaks of the shared co- 
becom ings in which the two are mutu ally 
implied: they are symbi otic and emer gent. 
Such situ ated case studies are not merely 
ideal ity – an ideal ity which is to serve as a 
support to the exper i mental paradigm of 
science, with the least possible semantical 
(biased) import. 
 7. Shannon discusses the term negat ive 
entropy, but considers its distinc tion negli-
gible for inform a tion as a math em at ical 
quant ity notion. It was Norbert Wiener, 
who, via the work by John von Neumann, 
Alan Turing, Claude Shannon and Leo 
Szilard, main tained against Shannon that 
negen tropy is in fact crucial, rather than 
negli gible for a math em at ical theory of 
inform a tion; it is largely due to this dispute 
that until today, diﬀ er ent notions of 
math em at ical inform a tion are in usage: 
(1) inform a tion as a measure for order 
in terms of entropy, and (2) inform a tion 
as a measure for order as negen tropy; 
while both speak of inform a tion as a 
measure, and hence capable of estab lish-
ing order, the two concepts of order are 
actu ally inverse to each other: order as 
negen tropy means minimal entropy 
(maximal amount of bound energy, 
minimal of free or avail able energy in 
Schrödinger’s terms), while order as 
entropy means minimal negen tropy 
(maximal amount of free and avail able 
energy, minimal amount of bound energy 
in Schrödinger’s terms). Much confu sion 
in the under stand ing of ‘inform a tion’ 
arises from this still today.  
 8. ‘Leben, Information, und der zweite 
Hauptsatz 
der 
Th ermodynamik’, 
in 
 Hermes III Übersetzung (Berlin: Merve, 
1992), 53–96, Here in my own English 
trans la tion, pp. 90–1. 
 9. Ibid. 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 MEDIANATURES  
 Media is hardly just about media. 
Furthermore, nature is not merely nature