PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POLITICAL AFFECT

phor is used guardedly’ (2002: 35; italics in 
original). It is the feeling of change in the 
rela tion of bodies politic: the feeling 
of the change in the ﬁ rst- order body politic 
in the encounter with another body politic 
(thus not an intro spect ive percep tion of an 
isol ated body, but a feeling of the body 
in rela tion), and the feeling of how the 
present feeling might vary in rela tion to 
what might happen next in a variety of 
futures. Aﬀ ect then is a resol u tion of a 
complex diﬀ er en tial ﬁ eld, relat ing changes 
in bodies politic, or more precisely, the 
changes in the rela tions among chan ging 
ﬁ rst- and second- order bodies politic. 
Now in some cases, situ ations are ‘well in 
hand’, and aﬀ ects collapse into emotions 
having some thing of a repres ent at ive func-
tion: they show us how things actu ally are 
and how they will evolve. But this is 
emotion as subject ive capture of aﬀ ect. In 
some other cases, the situ ation exceeds our 
ability to make sense of it; aﬀ ect extends 
beyond the body’s ability to emotion ally 
repres ent the situ ation; we are over-
whelmed and thrown out of kilter. 
 Here we are at the limit of faculty of 
sens ib il ity: these situ ations cannot be 
sensed from an actu al ized point of view of 
recog ni tion and common sense (‘it makes 
no sense’), but can only be felt, that is, 
‘sensed’, as point ing to a diﬀ er en tial ﬁ eld 
beyond ‘normal’ sense- making as recog ni-
tion, as concep tual- emotional capture and 
processing. In other words, an intens ive 
encounter outside normal/actual aﬀ ect ive 
cogni tion habits (modelled as a move 
outside the basin of attrac tion, or better, 
outside the normal attractor layout as 
habitual response capa cit ies), provides 
access to the virtual. Th is access is exper i-
enced as a strange feeling, a feeling of 
being out of step with your normal habits; 
in this strange ness lies the poten tial to 
open an adapt ive response as creat ive 
event throw ing up a new attractor layout, 
non- cognit ive aﬀ ect oppos i tion Zerilli 
posits by its incor por a tion of the notion of 
‘aﬀ ect ive cogni tion’. Th is takes both elements 
all the way down, in keeping with Evan 
Th ompson’s ‘enact iv ism’ posi tion in his 
Mind in Life (2007). Enactivism holds to a 
notion of sense- making, which is found 
even in single- celled organ isms. So polit-
ical aﬀ ect does not hold to a layer- cake 
onto logy: aﬀ ect and cogni tion are part ners 
all the way down. It’s certainly true that 
almost- completely-desubjectifying exper i-
ences of rage and panic exist, but they are 
rare epis odes of approach ing a limit that 
activ ates ‘aﬀ ect programs’ ( Griﬃ  ths 1997 ). 
Aﬀ ect provides sali ence (draws cognit ive 
atten tion) but doesn’t over whelm/under-
mine cogni tion, though when we get close 
to the limit of desub jec ti ﬁ c a tion our qual-
it at ive analyses should change. 
 To pick up the posit ive formu la tion of 
polit ical aﬀ ect as sense- making, the diﬀ er-
en tial rela tion in the sense- making of 
bodies politic is that between poten tials for 
becom ings or assemblage form a tions 
which vary as the members of the encounter 
make a ‘move’ in the social game, moves in 
which someone oﬀ ers, commands, cajoles, 
persuades, pleads and so on. Th e possible 
moves of a situ ation are the moves allowed 
by embod ied compet ences. But these 
possible moves are them selves taken up in 
rela tions of change: what Deleuze and 
Guattari call ‘de- territ ori al iz a tion’ (leading 
to what would be unex pec ted, because 
chan ging the allow able patterns of the 
game) and ‘re- territ ori al iz a tion’ (settling 
back into an old game, or setting forth the 
poten tials of the new game) ( Massumi 
2002 : 71-80). 
 Political aﬀ ect is the feeling for this 
vari ation; it is the intens ive as opening up 
access to the virtual, to the diﬀ er en tial 
ﬁ eld, idea, or multi pli city of the situ ation. 
As Massumi puts it: ‘Aﬀ ect is the virtual 
as point of view, provided the visual meta-