PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN DISABILITY AND DISHUMAN STUDIES

being of our present ethno- class (i.e. 
Western bour geois) concep tion of the 
human, Man, which over- repres ents itself 
as if it were the human itself, and that of 
secur ing the well- being, and there fore the 
full cognit ive and beha vi oral autonomy of 
the human species itself/ourselves’ (ibid.: 
260). We read Wynter’s response here as 
delib er ately human istic and in concert 
with the new human ism that Frantz Fanon 
( 1993 ) had in mind: an expan sion ist 
reclaim ing of the category of the human. 
A polit ical and prac tical response to this 
over- repres ent a tion has involved excluded 
others of the empir ical human world 
seeking recog ni tion through the norm at ive 
legal frame works that respect the right to 
live as a human being and pan- national 
declar a tions cher ish ing this phenomenon 
called the human. We could cite here, for 
example, the oppor tun it ies for human ist 
recog ni tion oﬀ ered by the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. We agree with Braidotti ( 2013 ) 
that these frame works continue to oﬀ er 
power ful forms of recog ni tion and appar-
atus for agit a tion for many people who 
under stand ably seek to be included in the 
human ist human category. 
 Posthuman analyses appear to inter-
vene in rather diﬀ er ent ways in response to 
the domin ance of human ism. One char ac-
ter trait of posthu man analyses is the 
rejec tion of the human category as an old- 
fash ioned, elitist and narrow phenomenon 
and, in its place, an opening up of new 
forms of subjectiv ity, rela tion al ity and 
social ity asso ci ated, for example, with post-
hu man concep tions such as the cyborg 
(Haraway), rhizomes (Deleuze and Guattari), 
animal- human fusions (Chen), and non- 
human monsters and chimeras (Shildrick). 
Similar responses can be found in the 
disab il ity community. Th e devel op ments of 
crip theory, activ ism, art, community and 
polit ics (see  McRuer 2006 ) celeb rate the 
 Humanism and the Posthuman 
Condition  
 Th e human is a self- aggrand iz ing, abstract 
ideal and symbol of clas sical human ity that 
was born in Europe ‘predic ated on eight-
eenth and nine teenth- century rendi tions 
of 
clas sical 
Antiquity 
and 
Italian 
Renaissance ideals’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 13) and 
shaped, more recently, through modern ist 
and capit al ist mould ings. ‘Humanity’, 
Braidotti