PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
METASTABILITY

relat ive perman ence was that, as Simondon 
explains, they did not have an appro pri ate 
phys ical paradigm to help them make 
sense of such states. ‘In order to deﬁ ne 
meta sta bil ity, it is neces sary to intro duce 
the notion of the poten tial energy resid ing 
in a given system, the notion of order and 
that of an increase in entropy’ (ibid.: 302). 
Only then is it possible to get a ﬁ rm grasp 
of the becom ing of being ‘as it doubles itself 
and falls out of step with itself [ se déphaser ] 
in the process of indi vidu at ing’ (301). 
 Simondon’s notion of the indi vidual 
chal lenges estab lished ideas about oneness 
and same ness in two respects: ﬁ rst, the indi-
vidual is never completely one with itself, 
and second, it is not the whole being but 
merely a phase in the ongoing genesis of 
being. Th e indi vidual, there fore, has only a 
relat ive reality; there is always more to being 
than what is made to appear in a single act 
of indi vidu ation. To come to terms with this 
‘more’, the non- iden tity of the indi vidual 
with itself, Simondon intro duces the notion 
of the ‘prein di vidual’. Th e idea that becom-
ing happens in phases, and that the indi-
vidual has only a relat ive exist ence as an 
expres sion of one of these phases, presup-
poses the exist ence of a prein di vidual state. 
As Muriel Combes succinctly puts it: 
 Before all indi vidu ation, being can be 
under stood as a system contain ing poten-
tial energy. Although this energy becomes 
active within the system, it is called poten-
tial because it requires a trans form a tion 
of the system in order to be struc tured, 
that is, to be actu al ized in accord ance 
with struc tures. Preindividual being, and 
in a general way, any system in a meta-
stable state, harbors poten tials that are 
incom pat ible because they belong to 
hetero gen eous dimen sions of being. 
 Combes 2013: 3–4 
 Th is is why prein di vidual being – conceived 
as a meta stable system rife with poten tials 
 METASTABILITY  
 Th e philo sophy of Gilbert Simondon 
(1924–89) is a key resource for current 
theor iz ing that ques tions the idea of the 
human as a priv ileged and stand- alone 
entity. By oﬀ er ing an alto gether new theory 
of what consti tutes an ‘indi vidual’, he 
eﬀ ect ively chal lenges the basic tenets of 
Western logic and meta phys ics, and with 
that, commonly assumed ideas about unity 
and iden tity. At the same time, Simondon’s 
philo sophy has ines tim able value as a 
correct ive to contem por ary approaches 
that, taking inspir a tion from cyber net ics 
and inform a tion theory, tend to conﬂ ate 
living being and tech nical being on the 
assump tion that there are no signi ﬁ c ant 
diﬀ er ences between humans and other 
intel li gent systems such as machines. 
 Instead of talking about substance, 
matter and form, Simondon conceives of 
the indi vidual in terms of systems and 
states – with special emphasis on the 
notion of ‘meta sta bil ity’, which he borrows 
from ther mo dy nam ics. Th e problem with 
the received ways of conceiv ing the indi-
vidual, whether from the substan tial ist 
view point or from the hylo morphic view-
point, is that there is no proper place for 
the process of indi vidu ation; that is, for the 
genesis of the indi vidual. Classical notions 
of unity and iden tity, which conceives the 
indi vidual either as a self- identical entity or 
as a conjunc tion of form and matter, 
prevent us from under stand ing onto gen-
esis, the becom ing of being. As Simondon 
points out, the ancients, who in their theor-
iz ing recog nized nothing but instabil ity 
and stabil ity, move ment and rest, had no 
clear concep tion of meta sta bil ity. For them, 
being excludes becom ing because ‘being 
was impli citly presumed to be in a state of 
stable equi lib rium at all times’ (1992: 301).  1 
Th e reason why the ancients failed to 
recog nize the exist ence of states with