PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
RESILIENCE

well beyond ecology. More recently, these 
initi at ives have been brought together 
within the Stockholm Resilience Centre, a 
high- proﬁ le think- tank which promotes 
the uses of resi li ence theory in inter na-
tional envir on ment and devel op ment 
projects. Emblematic in the name change 
of the house journal from  Conservation 
Ecology to  Ecology and Society , the Alliance 
and Stockholm Resilience Centre was no 
longer concerned with resi li ence as a prop-
erty of ecosys tems but of the co- evol u tion 
of soci et ies and ecosys tems as a single 
system. Th is new research into ‘social- 
ecolo gical resi li ence’ aspires to set the 
ground rules for a general systems theory 
capable of integ rat ing society, the economy 
and the biosphere in a posthu man world. 
Th is total ity is dubbed the ‘Panarchy’: 
  the struc ture in which systems, includ ing 
those of nature (e.g., forests) and of humans 
(e.g., capit al ism), as well as combined 
human- natural systems (e.g., insti tu tions 
that govern natural resource use such as the 
Forest Service), are inter linked in continual 
adapt ive cycles of growth, accu mu la tion, 
restruc tur ing, and renewal.  
 Gunderson and Holling 2002 
 Th ere is a signi ﬁ c ant diﬀ er ence in scope 
and tone between this later deﬁ n i tion of 
socio- ecolo gical resi li ence and Holling’s 
earlier work. Holling is no longer arguing 
that 
some 
socio- ecolo gical 
systems 
undergo extreme ﬂ uc tu ations; nor even 
that all systems enter into stress condi tions 
under the demands of maximum sustained 
yield; but rather that  all ecosys tem  and 
social- ecolo gical system dynam ics can be 
approached heur ist ic ally as non- linear 
iter a tions of an ‘adapt ive cycle’, moving 
through the phases of rapid succes sional 
growth ( r ) followed by stable equi lib rium 
(K), by collapse (Ω), and then a spon tan-
eous reor gan iz a tion that leads to a new 
growth phase ( α ) ( Holling 1992 ). Having 
emerged as a crit ical perspect ive on 
modern ist theor ies of economic growth in 
the post-Second World War era, resi li ence 
theory now presents itself as an altern at ive 
theory of growth in non- equi lib rium 
condi tions – one that is capable of explain-
ing the general dynam ics of social and 
ecolo gical evol u tion in a more than human 
world. 
 Today, we might argue that the science 
of complex adapt ive systems has become 
a theor et ical refer ence point for the full 
spec trum of contem por ary risk inter ven-
tions. Its inﬂ u ence is now felt in arenas as 
diverse as psycho logy, educa tion, urban 
plan ning, global devel op ment policy, milit-
ary strategy, disaster and risk manage ment, 
social policy, central banking, ﬁ nan cial 
econom ics, 
ecosys tems 
science 
and 
resource manage ment. Whereas energy 
physics played a found a tional role in clas-
sical modern ist theor ies of economic and 
ecolo gical organ iz a tion, and the homeo-
static systems of ﬁ rst order cyber net ics 
domin ated the economic and milit ary 
sciences of the Cold War, complex ity 
science now serves as a source of natur al-
iz ing meta phors for contem por ary prac-
tices of secur ity, and func tions to neut ral ize 
crit ical inquiry into the disastrous con-
sequences of neolib eral approaches to 
ﬁ nan cial regu la tion, urban plan ning and 
crisis response, envir on mental policy and 
devel op ment. Since the nineties, global 
ﬁ nan cial 
insti tu tions 
such 
as 
the 
International Monetary Fund ( IMF 1996, 
2006) the World Bank ( 2006 ,  2008 ), and 
the Bank for International Settlements 
( BIS  2002 ,  2008 ), have increas ingly incor-
por ated strategies of ‘resi li ence’ into their 
logist ics of crisis manage ment, ﬁ nan cial 
(de)regu la tion and devel op ment econom-
ics. With the post–9/11 revolu tion in 
‘home land secur ity’, resi li ence has become