POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
GEO-HYDRO-SOLAR-BIO-TECHNO-POLITICS

multiple actual (or ‘diﬀ er en ci ated’) forms 
of human life from irre du cibly diﬀ er en ti-
ated ‘multi pli cit ies’, that is, networks of 
natural, social, polit ical and physiolo gical 
processes. Th is analysis does not deny 
subjectiv ity, but embeds it in processes 
above, below and along side the subject. 
Here we see ‘bodies politic’ that imbric ate 
the social and the somatic: the repro duc-
tion of social systems requires produ cing 
certain types of ‘somatic bodies politic’ 
(those whose aﬀ ect ive- cognit ive patterns 
and trig gers ﬁ t the func tional needs of 
the system) while those social systems or 
‘civic bodies politic’ are them selves bodily 
in the sense of direct ing mater ial ﬂ ows 
( Protevi 2009 ). 
 Using the ancient Athenian Empire as a 
case study of geo- hydro-solar- bio-techno- 
polit ics, we can look above the subject to 
the geopol it ics of circuits of food qua 
captured solar energy, below to polit ical 
physiology qua entrain ment- provoked 
solid ar ity, and along side to bio- tech nical 
assemblages such as the phalanx and the 
trireme ( Protevi 2013 ). Th e choice of this 
case study is useful in disab us ing us of the 
present ist notion that only now are we 
enter ing a posthu man age. Th e geo- hydro-
solar- bio-techno multi pli city behind the 
morpho gen esis of imbric ated civic and 
somatic bodies politic in the ancient 
Mediterranean world includes geolo gical 
factors such as ground slopes and surface 
fric tion; biolo gical factors such as type 
and strength of local ﬂ ora and fauna; and 
hydro lo gical factors such as river currents, 
chan nels and wave strengths. In addi tion, 
it also includes social- tech nical factors 
such as the speed capa city of warfare 
assemblages: the phalanx as man–spear–
shield assemblage; the chariot as horse– 
men (driver and ﬁ ghter)– bow assemblage; 
and, the water borne assemblages of rower- 
powered warships and sailing- power 
merchant ships. 
 It may seem odd at ﬁ rst, but from the 
geo- hydro-solar- bio-techno- polit ics 
perspect ive we can claim olive oil as a key 
factor in the genesis of Athenian demo-
cracy. Olive oil is a storage form of solar 
energy burned for light in lamps and 
burned for energy in human bodies. One 
of the tipping points in the demo crat iz a-
tion process in Athens occurs when Solon 
forbids debt slavery and debt bondage 
( Raaﬂ aub, Ober and Wallace 2007 : 59;  Ste 
Croix 1981 : 137, 282) as well as all agri cul-
tural exports except that of olive oil. Th is 
last provi sion stabil izes the middle class 
of small farmers who were threatened 
by aris to cratic domin ance by provid ing 
them with a ready cash crop ( Milne 1945 ; 
 Molina 1998 ). Th is stabil iz a tion of a mass 
olive oil export market also creates 
demand for work by urban artis ans who 
produce jars for olive oil and manu fac-
tured goods for export (also arms for 
hoplites 
to 
fore stall 
aris to cratic 
re- 
conquest). A growing urban popu la tion 
needs grain import a tion, however, and 
protect ing the import routes needs a naval 
force. In turn, what we can call the ‘milit ary 
egal it ari an ism’ thesis retains its force, 
and claims that a depend ence on a naval 
force pushes the regime toward urban 
demo cracy, that is, to expand ing the polit-
ical base beyond that of the hoplites, for 
rowers are drawn from the ranks of urban 
masses unable to aﬀ ord hoplite gear 
( Raaﬂ aub et  al. 2007 : 119–36;  Gabrielsen 
2001 ). 
 Now 
demo cratic 
rowing 
in 
the 
Athenian navy (leaving aside the ques tion 
of seaborne marine troops) was relat ively 
low intens ity, at least compared to the 
hand- to-hand ﬁ ght ing depic ted in Homer, 
and the phalanx clashes of the clas sical age. 
(Actually, we should note that ‘hand- to-
hand’ is a misnomer, for shield and sword/
spear is itself quite a bit less intense than 
just one- on-one with hands.) Th us for