POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
TRANS- CORPOR EAL ITY

disem bod ied and removed from the world 
he surveys. Th e trans- corpor eal subject is 
gener ated through and entangled with 
biolo gical, tech no lo gical, economic, social, 
polit ical and other systems, processes and 
events, at vastly diﬀ er ent scales. Trans- 
corpor eal ity ﬁ nds itself within capit al ism, 
but resists the allure of shiny objects, 
consid er ing instead the eﬀ ects they have, 
from manu fac ture to disposal, while reck-
on ing with the strange agen cies that inter-
con nect substance, ﬂ esh and place. It does 
not contem plate discrete objects from a 
safe distance, but instead, thinks  as the very 
stuﬀ  of the ever- emer gent world ( Alaimo 
2016 ). 
 Th inking as the stuﬀ  of the world has a 
long femin ist history, due to the way women, 
along with racially marked and disabled 
peoples, have grappled with being subjects 
oft en categor ized and system at ic ally treated 
as objects. Trans- corpor eal ity, along with 
other theor et ical concepts within femin ist 
posthu man it ies, suggests a new ﬁ gur a tion 
of the human aft er the Human, which is not 
founded on detach ment, dual isms, hier-
arch ies or excep tion al ism, and which does 
not, in Val Plumwood’s terms, ‘back ground’ 
nature (1993). Like Rosi Bradotti’s trans-
versal subject outlined in  Th e Posthuman 
and other works, the ‘trans’ of transcor-
por eal ity insists on multiple hori zontal 
cross ings, trans its and trans form a tions. 
As Braidotti contends, ‘Th e chal lenge for 
crit ical theory is moment ous: we need to 
visu al ize the subject as a trans versal entity 
encom passing the human, our genetic 
neigh bours the animals and the earth as a 
whole’ (2013: 82). 
 I developed the concept of trans- 
corpor eal ity while editing the collec tion 
 Material Feminisms (2008) with Susan J. 
Hekman and while writing  Bodily Natures: 
Science, Environment, and the Material Self 
(2010). In an earlier essay about archi tec-
ture and envir on mental ethics, I had drawn 
upon femin ist theor ies of corpor eal ity, 
includ ing the ‘inter cor por eal ity’ of Gail 
Weiss, which, she