POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY

ﬂ ash, zombies were slaves. Even now, 
Haitian people are not afraid of a zombie 
– they are afraid of becom ing one. In colo-
nial times, the people of Saint Domingo 
considered death as the only escape from 
slavery, to which they were condemned by 
life. Death meant a return to the mother 
Africa, a passage to a second life of the soul. 
Th at’s why zombi ﬁ c a tion is the worst of all 
punish ments: it turns one into a slave for 
ever, without a possib il ity of dying prop-
erly, that is, ﬁ nally being set free. Slavery as 
a univer sal condi tion of being of Africans 
in Haiti was thus exten ded to their aft er life 
(see  Cohen 1972 : 60). In today’s Haiti, 
to raise the dead is oﬃ   cially a crim inal 
oﬀ ence, and zombies, who emerge as a 
result of the synthesis of the black magic 
and the black slave market, are considered 
as victims. How can we not compare it with 
the non- random fact that in ancient Egypt 
‘killed- living’ was the name for the captives 
who, instead of being destroyed phys ic ally, 
were killed symbol ic ally by slavery? 
 From here, the second season of zombies 
arises, in which they appear not as real- life 
entit ies, but as a  social meta phor , point ing 
at indi vidu als and groups of people who are 
deprived of freedom or free will. Interpolated 
by the symbol ism of modern ity, the zombie 
as an auto maton which only obeys orders 
remains for the prolet arian, trans form ing 
her living labour into dead capital in the 
process of alien a tion. Th e thing she produces 
and elab or ates does not belong to her; the 
wages she gets imme di ately go to the repro-
duc tion of her func tion in the produc tion 
processes where she is just a means. 
Structurally, for Marx, there is no big diﬀ er-
ence between a prolet arian and a slave – 
both are unfree, and their very human 
essence is basic ally reduced to the condi tion 
of the living dead ( Marx 1844 ). In the course 
of the devel op ment of contem por ary 
culture, the meaning of this social meta phor 
shift s from labour and produc tion to sheer 
consump tion. From the prolet arian, the 
zombie becomes consumer. It embod ies the 
very idea of consump tion as such, a non- 
stop devour ing, a thirst which can never be 
satis ﬁ ed, a desire with no subject. But the 
subject matter is still the same: the zombie 
as consumer remains unfree, submit ted to 
some external forces. Th us, in Russia, people 
call their  TV sets ‘zombie- boxes’ – some-
thing like ‘idiot box’ but with an addi tional 
meaning of tele vi sion as a means of mass 
zombi ﬁ c a tion. In fact, the contra dic tion 
between the zombie- produ cer (slave or 
prolet arian) and the zombie- consumer is 
dialect ical: let us appre ci ate the fact that 
every consumer by every act of consump-
tion contrib utes to the processes of the 
produc tion of value, upon which the capit-
al ist system is based. Th e civil society ruled 
by money itself resembles, as Hegel writes in 
his Jena texts of 1805–6, ‘a life of the dead 
body that moves itself within itself’ ( Hegel 
1979 : 249). 
 Th e zombie as a meta phor for unfree-
dom gives birth to the idea that every one 
might be or can poten tially become a 
zombie. Th is gener ates a kind of fear which 
contrib utes to the essen tial plot of the third 
season of zombies, who now change their 
nature and become priv ileged  cine matic 
creatures. In contrast to real- life Haitian 
zombies, 
contem por ary 
Hollywood 
zombies are species that seems to preclude 
any ﬁ gure of control. Staying at the border 
between comedy and horror, they repres-
ent pure destruc tion. Cinematic zombies 
repres ent an abso lute evil that oper ates 
on Earth without any purpose. It is not 
pois on ing, not a magic ritual, which turns 
one into a zombie, but a conta gion, a virus 
taken from another zombie or else where. 
Removed from their enslaved and prolet-
arian origins, which linked them to labour, 
they are now ﬁ gures of a pure negat iv ity 
and the main char ac ters of the apoca lypse