POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
NON-HUMAN AGENCY

is (or should be) a prime aim of the post-
hu man ist project. 2 By not recog niz ing the 
lively forces that intra- act in becom ing- 
with(in) our more- than-human world, 
human hubris fuelled notions of human-
kind’s ability to tran scend its ‘natural’ 
limits, control its surround ings and 
conquer the entire mater ial world in the 
name of comfort, tech no logy and progress, 
in reac tion, rather than response, to 
perceived needs or, more accur ately, ﬂ eet-
ing human yearn ings. As the posthu man 
project gathers momentum, this restric ted 
and deﬁ n it ively human ist under stand ing 
of agency must be inter rog ated for its tran-
scend ent procliv it ies, in search of a much 
more mundane, mater ial sense of what it 
means to act or to inter vene and produce 
some times unfore see able eﬀ ects, in a lively 
and agen tial more- than-human network 
of rela tion al ity. 
 As posthu man ist thinkers continue to 
attempt to dethrone, decentre or deter rit-
ori al ize, what Western philo sophy has 
called the autonom ous human, with its 
hubristic and over con ﬁ d ent connota tions 
of excep tion al ism and tran scend ence – 
what has been considered the measure of 
all things, for far too long ( Derrida 2008 : 
135) – the Anthropocene in many respects 
seems to under mine these move ments, by 
reaﬃ   rm ing the central role that human 
activ ity has played in creat ing our current 
and continu ing ecolo gical condi tions. 
Deleuze and Guattari suggest that all 
deter rit ori al iz a tions are always intric ately 
involved in reter rit ori al iz a tions: ‘the two 
becom ings inter link and form relays in a 
circu la tion of intens it ies pushing the 
deter rit ori al iz a tion ever further’ (1987: 
10). Th us, a recog ni tion of non- human 
agen cies as entwined parti cipants in our 
becom ing further allows us to curb our 
tran scend ent inclin a tions. Moreover, what 
the Anthropocene actu ally does, then, is 
call atten tion to the many other agen tial 
forces and beings with which we have 
always already been in constant intra- 
action during our overzeal ous forays into 
the previ ously deemed separ ate ‘natural’ 
world, which we have up until now failed 
to recog nize. It forces us to recon ﬁ g ure 
and ‘reter rit ori al ize’ the human within a 
volat ile mix of agen cies, beings and forces, 
where the human is only one among a 
multi pli city of agents who are active in 
determ in ing and enact ing our (human or 
not) future possib il it ies. 
 As Western human excep tion al ism has 
led to the many agen tial assemblages that 
now plague our troub ling ecolo gical times 
– mani fest ing as super- storms, envir on-
mental decay, toxicity, and mass species 
extinc tions (to name a few) – the umbrella 
term ‘the Anthropocene’ forces us to recon-
sider these massive aﬀ ect ive non- human 
agen cies that we have unleashed, or at the 
very least helped to intensify. With the 
impos ing 
ﬁ gure 
of 
climate 
change, 
constantly surpris ing/shock ing us with its 
diverse embod i ments and aﬀ ects, a rene-
go ti ation of the human’s place in the 
mater ial world is neces sary and demands 
that the agen tial mater i al ity that has always 
played an intric ate role in our becom ing 
with(in) the world be not only acknow-
ledged, but considered on equal onto lo-
gical grounds. Th is rene go ti ation will 
entail a new under stand ing of what it 
means to be agen tial, where agency is 
consider as a collab or at ive action or ‘ an 
enact ment, not some thing someone or 
some thing has ’ ( Barad 2007 : 178). Yet, as 
Barad points out, ‘the acknow ledge ment of 
“nonhu man agency” does not lessen 
human account ab il ity’ (ibid.: 219). Rather, 
this acknow ledge ment should force us to 
become more account able than we ever 
have been before, to the diverse muddle of 
other- than-human agen cies with whom 
we compose our common world. Alaimo 
contends that ‘the inter act ing mater ial