
POSTHUMAN 
GLOSSARY 
 
i
ALSO AVAILABLE IN THE THEORY SERIES  
 Conﬂ icting Humanities , edited by Rosi Braidotti and Paul Gilroy 
 General Ecology , edited by Erich Hörl with James Burton 
ii
POSTHUMAN 
GLOSSARY 
 Edited by Rosi  Braidotti and  Maria  Hlavajova 
 BLOOMSBURY ACADEMIC  
 An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 
LONDON • OXFORD • NEW YORK • NEW DELHI • SYDNEY
 
iii
Bloomsbury Academic 
 An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 
 WC 1B 3 DP  
 NY 10018 
 
 UK  
 USA  
 www.blooms bury.com 
 BLOOMSBURY and the Diana logo are trade marks of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 
 First published 2018 
 © Rosi Braidotti, Maria Hlavajova and contrib ut ors, 2018 
 Rosi Braidotti and Maria Hlavajova have asser ted their right under the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be iden ti ﬁ ed as Editors of this work.  
 All rights reserved. No part of this public a tion may be repro duced or trans mit ted 
in any form or by any means, elec tronic or mech an ical, includ ing photo copy ing, 
record ing, or any inform a tion storage or retrieval system, without prior permis sion 
in writing from the publish ers. 
 No respons ib il ity for loss caused to any indi vidual or organ iz a tion acting on 
or refrain ing from action as a result of the mater ial in this public a tion can be 
accep ted by Bloomsbury or the author. 
 British Library Cataloguing- in-Publication Data  
 A cata logue record for this book is avail able from the British Library.  
 
 ISBN : 
 HB : 
978-1-350-03024-4 
 
 
 PB : 
978-1-350-03025-1 
 
 
 e PDF : 
978-1-350-03023-7 
 
 
 ePub: 
978-1-350-03026-8 
 Library of Congress Cataloging- in-Publication Data  
 A catalog record for this book is avail able from the Library of Congress. 
 Series: Theory  
 Typeset by  Reﬁ neCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk  
iv
Acknowledgements 
xii 
 Series Preface 
xiii 
 List of Contributors 
xiv 
 Introduction 
 Ahuman, the 
 AI (Artifi cial Intelligence) 
 Jamie ‘Skye’ Bianco 
 Algorithmic Studies 
 Mel Y. Chen 
 Animal 
 Animism (Limulus) 
 Anthropism/Immanent Humanism 
 Neni Panourgiá 
 Anthropocene Observatory 
 John Palmesino and Aun-Sofi  
Rönnskog –  Territorial Agency and 
Armin Linke 
 Anthropocene 
 Anthr oˉ pos 
 Neni Panourgiá 
 Contents 
 
v
vi 
CONTENTS
 Cosmopolitics 
 M. Beatrice Fazi 
 Digital Rubbish 
 (Material) Ecocriticism 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 Art 
 Biological Arts/Living Arts 
 Neni Panourgiá 
 Blue Humanities 
 Commons, the 
 Contemporary, The
CONTENTS 
vii
 G 
 Gaga Feminism 
 Erich Hörl 
 Geo- hydro-solar- bio-techno- polit ics 
 Green/Environmental Humanities 
 MTL Collective (Nitasha Dhillon and 
Amin Husain)  
 H 
 Hacking Habitat 
 In- human, The 
 In/Human 
 Susan M. Squier 
 Equation (Mathematical 
Thinking)  
 Vera Bühlmann 
 Ethereal Scent 
 Goda Klumbyt e˙ 
 Extinction 
 Cecilia Åsberg 
 Food
viii 
CONTENTS
 Material Feminisms 
 Maxwell’s Demon
(Non- Anthro po centric Cognition)  
 Vera Bühlmann 
 Medianatures 
 Monster/The Unhuman 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 Neo/New Materialism 
 Interest/Interesse 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 ‘It’ 
 Joy, Ethics of 
 Goda Klumbyt e˙ 
 L 
 Lampedusa 
 Locality/Non- separ ab il ity
CONTENTS 
ix
 Pill, the (Posthuman Icon) 
 Dan Goodley, Rebecca Lawthom, 
Kirsty Liddiard and 
Katherine Runswick-Cole  
 Posthuman Ethics 
 Fiona R. Cameron 
 Neocolonial 
 Non- human Agency 
 Object- oriented Ontology (OOO) 
 Occupy (after Deleuze) 
 Ontological Turn, the 
 P2P (Peer to Peer) Economies
x 
CONTENTS
 Rewilding 
 SS = Security/Surveillance 
 Mirko Tobias Schäfer and 
Audrey Samson 
 Storied Matter 
 Posthuman Rights, A Micropolitics of 
 Eileen A. Joy 
 Precognition 
 Pregnant Posthuman, The
CONTENTS 
xi
 Violence 
 Koen Leurs, Tamara Shepherd 
and Alison Harvey  
 Z 
 Zombie 
 Birgit M. Kaiser and Kathrin Thiele 
 Tolerances and Duration 
 Trans* 
 Goda Klumbyt e˙ 
 Trans- corpor eal ity 
 Transhumanism/Posthumanism 
 (Un)Docu mented Citizenship
Acknowledgements 
 Th is volume is the culmin a tion of a seminar 
series, ‘Posthuman Glossary’, at  BAK , basis 
voor actuele kunst, Utrecht in 2015. 
Th e series was concep tu al ized by Rosi 
Braidotti and real ized in the context of 
 BAK research project Future Vocabularies/
Human–Inhuman–Posthuman 
and 
in 
cooper a tion with the programme ‘Th e 
Humanities in the Twenty-First Century’ of 
the Centre for the Humanities at Utrecht 
University, Utrecht. 
 Th e co- editors Rosi Braidotti and Maria 
Hlavajova would like thank the large, hard- 
working and dedic ated teams that set up 
the initial seminar series in both insti tu-
tions, and the equally talen ted team of 
editors and assist ants who helped with the 
ﬁ nal public a tion. Special grat it ude to 
Tobijn de Graauw and Toa Maes for input 
at both the content and the organ iz a tional 
level. Our heart felt thanks to the managing 
editor of the edit or ial assist ants team Goda 
Klumbytė, who main tained the main 
contact with the authors, co- ordin ated the 
editing of the manu script and completed 
the complex bibli o graph ical details, with 
the help of Elisa Fiore. 
 Th anks also to image editor Lucy Lopez, 
author editor Tom Clark, edit or ial assist-
ants Hidde van Greuningen and Gry 
Ulstein, and copy- editor Stephanie Paalvast. 
We are also grate ful to many colleagues 
from the Utrecht University, the Centre for 
the Humanities and the  BAK team for 
parti cip at ing in the events that led to this 
public a tion. 
 Sincere thanks are owed to all contrib-
ut ors to this volume, includ ing the artists 
who contrib uted their visual work and 
made  Posthuman Glossary an inter dis cip-
lin ary conver sa tion. 
 Last but not least, the co- editors wish 
to acknow ledge, through this volume as 
much as through the many projects in 
their decade- long collab or a tion, that the 
academic and the artistic insti tu tions 
belong to, and are account able for, one and 
the same world.  
xii
Series Preface 
 Th eory is back. 
 Critical theor ists of the univer sal, organic 
or situ ated kind used to be deﬁ ned by their 
ethical- polit ical commit ment to account for 
power rela tions at work in the real world, as 
well as in scientiﬁ c prac tice. But their 
prestige waned through out the 1990s. Th e 
‘theory wars’ in the  USA targeted crit ical 
theory as an outdated ideo lo gical activ ity, 
dismiss ing the theor ists as ‘tenured radic als’. 
Th ey were replaced by new ‘content 
providers’, experts and consult ants, in a 
context of increased privat iz a tion of 
academic research. By the turn of the 
millen nium, with the inter net as the only 
true ‘content provider’, former theor ists were 
relo cated to the market- oriented posi tion of 
‘ideas brokers’ and, in the best cases, ‘ideas 
leaders’. Nowadays, we are all entre pren eurs 
of the mind. Th e cognit ive char ac ter of 
contem por ary capit al ism and its high tech-
no lo gical medi ation para doxic ally produced 
a ‘post- theory’ mood and intens i ﬁ ed attacks 
on radical thought and crit ical dissent. Th is 
negat ive mood also resul ted in criti cism of 
the social and schol arly value of the 
Humanities, in a neo- liberal corpor ate 
univer sity ruled by quan ti ﬁ ed econom ics 
and the proﬁ t motive. 
 And yet, the vital ity of crit ical think ing 
in the world today is palp able, as is a spirit 
of insur gency that sustains it. Th eoretical 
prac tice may have stalled in the academic 
world, but it exploded with renewed 
energy in other quar ters, in media, society, 
the arts and the corpor ate world. New 
gener a tions of crit ical ‘studies’ areas have 
grown along side the clas sical radical 
epistem o lo gies of the 1970s: gender, femin-
ist, queer, race, post co lo nial and subal tern 
studies, cultural studies, ﬁ lm, tele vi sion 
and media studies. Th e second gener a tion 
of crit ical ‘studies’ areas includes animal 
studies and ecocriti cism; cultural studies 
of science and society; reli gion studies; 
disab il ity studies; fat studies; success 
studies; celebrity studies; glob al iz a tion 
studies; and many more. New media has 
spawned new meta- ﬁ elds: soft  ware studies, 
inter net studies, game studies, digital post-
co lo nial studies and more. Th e end of the 
Cold War has gener ated conﬂ ict studies 
and peace research; human rights studies, 
human it arian manage ment; human rights- 
oriented medi cine; trauma, memory and 
recon cili ation studies; secur ity studies, 
death studies; suicide studies; and the list is 
still growing. Th ese diﬀ er ent gener a tions 
of ‘studies’ now consti tute a theor et ical 
force to be reckoned with. 
 Th eory is back! 
 Th is series aims to present carto graphic 
accounts of these emer ging crit ical theor-
ies and to reﬂ ect the vital ity and inspir a-
tional force of ongoing theor et ical debates. 
 Rosi Braidotti 
 
xiii
Contributors 
 Stacy Alaimo  is Professor of English, 
Distinguished Teaching Professor, and 
Director of the Environmental and 
Sustainability Studies Minor at the University 
of Texas at Arlington. Her  public a tions include 
 Undomesticated Ground: Recasting Nature 
as Feminist Space (2000),  Bodily Natures: 
Science, Environment, and the Material Self 
(2010) and  Protest and Pleasure: New 
Materialism, Environmental Activism, and 
Feminist Exposure (2016). 
 John Akomfrah  (born 1957 in Accra, Ghana) 
lives and works in London. He has had 
numer ous solo exhib i tions includ ing Nikolaj 
Kunsthal, Copenhagen, Denmark (2016), 
Arnolfi ni, Bristol,  UK (2016), Bildmuseet 
Umeå, Sweden (2015), Eli and Edythe Broad 
Art Museum, Michigan,  USA (2014), Tate 
Britain, London,  UK (2013–14) and a 
week- long series of screen ings at Mo MA , 
New York,  USA (2011). 
 Ramon Amaro  is Associate Lecturer in Critical 
Theory and Media Philosophy at the Centre 
for Cultural Studies, Digital Culture Unit, 
Goldsmiths, University of London. His joint 
academic back ground in philo sophy, 
soci ology and engin eer ing comes to fruition 
in his research looking at the philo soph ical 
dimen sions of computer model ling of social 
processes, with partic u lar refer ence to black 
ontology and algorithmic equal ity in machine 
learn ing systems. 
 Cecilia Åsberg  is Professor at Linköping University, 
Sweden. She leads The Seed Box: A Mistra–
Formas Environmental Humanities 
Collaboratory, the largest post- conven tional 
eco- human it ies initi at ive in Sweden. She directs 
the research group The Posthumanities Hub, 
and co- directs the three- univer sity centre for 
gender excel lence,  GEX cel International 
Collegium for Advanced Transdisciplinary 
Gender Studies. Her postdis cip lin ary research 
in gender studies trans lates into femin ist 
posthu man it ies. 
 Lila Athanasiadou  is a freelance writer, 
researcher and exhibition designer and the 
coordinator of the Corporeal Discourse 
program at the Master of Interior 
Architecture at ArtEZ. She has recently 
graduated from the Master of Architecture 
at TU Delft with a thesis on rethinking 
pedagogical practices through Guattari’s 
‘metamodelling’, examined through the 
genealogical relationships between Athens 
and Kassel as dramatized in the spatiality 
of documenta (14). 
 Daniel Baker  is an artist, curator and theor ist. A 
Romani Gypsy born in Kent, he holds a PhD 
in Gypsy aesthet ics from the Royal College of 
Art, London. Baker acted as exhib itor and 
advisor to the fi rst and second Roma 
Pavilions; ‘Paradise Lost’ and ‘Call the 
Witness’ at the 52nd and 54th Venice 
Biennales respect ively. His art and writing 
xiv
CONTRIBUTORS 
xv
 Zach Blas  is an artist and writer whose prac tice 
engages tech nics and minor it arian polit ics. 
Currently, he is a lecturer in the Department 
of Visual Cultures at Goldsmiths, University 
of London. His recent works  Facial 
Weaponization Suite (2011–14) and 
 Contra-Internet (2014–present) respond to 
tech no lo gical control, biomet ric govern ment-
al ity and network hege mony. Blas is 
produ cing two books:  Escaping the Face 
(Sternberg Press), and  Informatic Opacity: 
The Art of Defacement in Biometric Times . 
 Vivienne Bozalek  is a Professor of Social Work 
and the Director of Teaching and Learning at 
the University of the Western Cape ( UWC ), 
South Africa. Her areas of research include 
the use of post- struc tural, new mater i al ism, 
social justice and the polit ical ethics of care 
perspect ives, innov at ive pedago gical 
approaches in Higher Education. She has 
co- edited  Community, Self and Identity: 
Educating South African Students for 
Citizenship and  Discerning Hope in 
Educational Practices . 
 Rosi Braidotti  is a Distinguished University 
Professor at Utrecht University. Her books 
include  The Posthuman (2013),  Nomadic 
Theory: The Portable Rosi Braidotti (2011), 
 Transpositions: On Nomadic Ethics (2006), 
 Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist 
Theory of Becoming (2002) and  Nomadic 
Subjects: Embodiment and Sexual Difference 
in Contemporary Feminist Theory (2011). 
 Ethel Brooks  is an Associate Professor in the 
Departments of Women’s and Gender Studies 
and Sociology at Rutgers University. She is the 
author of  Unravelling the Garment Industry: 
Transnational Organizing and Women’s Work  
(2007). She is currently working on two book 
projects:  Disrupting the Nation: Land Tenure, 
Productivity and the Possibilities of a Romani 
Post-Coloniality and  (Mis)Recognitions and 
(Un)Acknowledgements: Visualities, 
Productivities and the Contours of Romani 
Feminism . 
examine the role of art in the enact ment of 
social agency. Recent public a tions include 
 We Roma: A Critical Reader in Contemporary 
Art (2013) and  Ex Libris (2009). 
 Michel Bauwens  is the founder of the 
Foundation for Peer to Peer Alternatives (P2P 
Foundation). Among others, he is one of 
three co- founders and part ners of the 
Commons Strategies Group. 
 Jane Bennett  is Professor of Political Science at 
Johns Hopkins University. She is one of the 
founders of the journal  Theory & Event , and is 
currently the editor of  Political Theory: An 
International Journal of Political Philosophy . 
She is the author of  Vibrant Matter: A Political 
Ecology of Things (2010),  The Enchantment 
of Modern Life (2001),  Thoreau’s Nature  
(1994), and  Unthinking Faith and 
Enlightenment (1987). 
 Jamie ‘Skye’ Bianco , Clinical Assistant Professor 
in  NYU ’s Department of Media, Culture and 
Communication, is a prac tice- based digital 
media theor ist, activ ist and artist. She mixes 
images, sound, video, anim a tion and lyrical 
prose in multimodal, perform at ive, web- based, 
compu ta tional/algorithmic and install a tion 
formats. She runs an organic veget able farm 
in the Catskill Mountains of New York and 
works on a multi- site ecolo gical invest ig a tion 
of toxic yet inhab ited water scapes. 
 Ursula Biemann  is an inde pend ent artist, writer 
and video essay ist based in Zurich. Her 
artistic prac tice is strongly research oriented 
and involves fi eld work in remote loca tions 
where she invest ig ates climate change and 
the ecolo gies of oil and water. 
 Ryan Bishop  is Professor of Global Art and 
Politics at the Winchester School of Art, 
University of Southampton. He co- edits the 
journal  Cultural Politics with John Armitage 
and Doug Kellner (Duke University Press) 
and the book series  Technicities on 
tech no lo c ul tural theory as it pertains to art, 
design and media for Edinburgh University 
Press.
xvi 
CONTRIBUTORS
organ izes fest ivals (‘Papay Gyro Nights’ with 
Serge Ivanov), creat ing a fertile place for art, 
thought and the earth to meet. 
 Mel Y. Chen  is Associate Professor of Gender 
and Women’s Studies at  UC Berkeley and 
Director of the Center for the Study of Sexual 
Culture. Their research and teach ing interests 
include queer and gender theory, animal 
studies, crit ical race theory and Asian 
American studies, disab il ity studies, science 
studies and crit ical linguist ics. Chen’s 2012 
book,  Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial 
Mattering, and Queer Affect , explores 
ques tions of racial iz a tion, queer ing, disab il ity 
and affect ive econom ies. 
 Keti Chukhrov  is an asso ci ate professor at the 
department of cultural studies at the Higher 
School of Economics (Moscow), visit ing 
professor at the European University at 
St Petersburg, and head of theory depart ment 
at the National Center for Contemporary Art. 
Chukhrov has authored numer ous texts on art 
theory, culture, polit ics and philo sophy. With 
her latest video- play  Love- machines she 
parti cip ated at the Bergen Assembly and 
‘Specters of Communism’ (James Gallery, 
 CUNY , New York, 2015). 
 Tom Clark  was Editor at  BAK , basis voor actuele 
kunst, Utrecht, and was a co- director of 
Arcadia Missa Gallery (2010–15) and 
editor- in-chief of Arcadia Missa Publications 
and the journal  How to Sleep Faster . Alongside 
this he is an inde pend ent editor, curator and 
publisher, also writing and teach ing on 
contem por ary art, curat ing and publish ing. His 
co- edited books include  (networked) every 
whisper is a crash on my ears (2014). 
 Bruce Clarke  is Paul Whitfi eld Horn Professor of 
Literature and Science in the Department of 
English at Texas Tech University. His research 
focuses on systems theory, narrat ive theory 
and ecology. Clarke edits the book series 
 Meaning Systems , published by Fordham 
University Press. His authored books include 
 Neocybernetics and Narrative (2014), 
 Vera Bühlmann  holds a PhD in media 
philo sophy from the University of Basel, and 
is founder and head of the labor at ory for 
applied virtu al ity (since 2010) at  CAAD  
 ETHZ , as well as a co- editor (with Ludger 
Hovestadt) of the applied virtu al ity book 
series (Birkhäuser, Vienna). The main vectors 
in her work revolve around the philo sophy 
and history of semi ot ics and math em at ics. 
Since 2005 she has been working as a 
lecturer and diploma coach at differ ent 
academies of art and design in Switzerland. 
 Fiona R. Cameron  is a senior research fellow at 
the Institute for Culture and Society, Western 
Sydney University, Australia. Fiona has 
researched and published widely on 
museums and their agency in contem por ary 
soci et ies around ‘hot’ topics of soci etal 
import ance ranging from the agen cies of the 
museum in climate change inter ven tions to 
mater ial culture, digital media, collec tions and 
docu ment a tion. She works with a range of 
theor et ical optics includ ing onto logy and the 
posthu man it ies to re- work museum prac tices. 
Books include the multi-authored monograph 
 Collecting; Ordering Governing  (Duke UP, 
2017) and an edited collection,  Climate 
Change Museum Futures (Routledge, 2014). 
 Oron Catts is an artist, researcher and curator 
whose pion eer ing work with the Tissue 
Culture and Art Project which he estab lished 
in 1996 is considered a leading biolo gical 
art project. In 2000 he co- founded 
SymbioticA, an artistic research centre 
housed within the School of Anatomy, 
Physiology and Human Biology, The 
University of Western Australia. Catts’ interest 
is Life; more specifi c ally the shift ing rela tions 
and percep tions of life in the light of new 
know ledge and it applic a tions. 
 Tsz Man Chan  is a nomad artist who works 
between perform ance, install a tion and video 
art, while trav el ling between Hong Kong and 
the remote Orkney Islands in the north of 
Scotland. When the seasons are right, she
CONTRIBUTORS 
xvii
artistic and theor etic agenda within 
insti tu tional and econom ical critique has 
evolved over twenty years, more recently 
focus ing on the early history of capit al ism 
and glob al iz a tion. As co- curator of such 
paradig matic exhib i tions as Messe 2ok 
(1995), ExArgentina (2004) and The Potosi 
Principle (2010), Creischer has developed a 
specifi c curat orial prac tice that correl ates 
with her work as an artist and theor ist, 
includ ing her extens ive prac tice in archive 
research. 
 Critical Software Thing is a collect ive of artists, 
thinkers and research ers inter ested in 
think ing ‘thing’ from the perspect ive of 
Software Studies. The group began as a 
series of discus sions and a shared set of 
interests around the notion of execu tion, 
questioning what exactly execu tion is and 
where some thing like a computer program 
might be under stood to execute. The group 
has published a book project provi sion ally 
titled  Executing Practices (published by 
Autonomedia in the DATA browser book 
series). Contributors to this entry are Audrey 
Samson, Lea Muldtofte, Winnie Soon, Eric 
Snodgrass and Francisco Gallardo as part of 
the Critical Software Thing collect ive. 
 Heather Davis  is a researcher and writer. She is 
working on a book called  Plastic: The Afterlife 
of Oil  for Duke University Press which traces 
the etho logy of plastic and its links to 
petro cap it al ism. She is the editor of  Art in 
the Anthropocene: Encounters Among 
Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and 
Epistemologies (Open Humanities Press) 
and  Desire Change: Contemporary Feminist 
Art in Canada ( MAWA and McGill Queen’s 
University Press, 2017). Her writing can be 
found at heather m davis.com. 
 Jolle Demmers  is Associate Professor of Confl ict 
Studies at the Department of History and Art 
History of Utrecht University. Her most recent 
work is on tech no lo gies of remote control (as 
deployed by the aid industry and in war) the 
 Posthuman Metamorphosis (2008) and 
 Energy Forms (2001). 
 Jeffrey Jerome Cohen  is Professor of English and 
Director of the Medieval and Early Modern 
Studies Institute at the George Washington 
University. He has published on medi eval 
studies, posthu man ism, mater i al ity, ecothe ory 
and the monstrous. His books include  Of 
Giants; Medieval Identity Machines ,  Hybridity, 
Identity and Monstrosity and  Stone: An 
Ecology of the Inhuman , as well as the edited 
collec tions  Monster Theory ,  Prismatic Ecology 
and  Elemental Ecocriticism . 
 Claire Colebrook is Edwin Erle Sparks Professor 
of English at Penn State University. She has 
published books and articles on liter ary 
history, queer theory, visual culture, the 
philo sophy of Gilles Deleuze and the poetry 
of William Blake. Her most recent book is 
 Twilight of the Anthropocene Idols (co- 
authored with Tom Cohen and J. Hillis Miller, 
2016). 
 Felicity Colman is Professor of Film and Media 
Arts at the Manchester School of Art, 
Manchester Metropolitan University. She is 
the author of  Film Theory: Creating a 
Cinematic Grammar (2014),  Deleuze and 
Cinema (2011), editor of  Film, Theory and 
Philosophy: The Key Thinkers (2009), and 
co- editor of  Global Arts & Local Knowledge 
(2016) and  Sensorium: Aesthetics, Art, Life 
(2007). She is co- editor (with David Deamer 
and Joanna Hodge) of the  A/V Journal of 
Practical and Creative Philosophy . 
 Melinda Cooper  is Associate Professor in the 
Department of Sociology and Social Policy at 
the University of Sydney, Australia. She is the 
author of  Life as Surplus: Biotechnology and 
Capitalism in the Neoliberal Era  (University of 
Washington Press 2008) and, with Catherine 
Waldby, of  Clinical Labor: Tissue Donors and 
Research Subjects in the Global Bioeconomy 
(Duke University Press 2014). 
 Alice Creischer  studied philo sophy, German 
liter at ure and visual arts in Düsseldorf. Her
xviii 
CONTRIBUTORS
its Others  ( ETS 2016) was awarded the 
philosophical prize "Vittorio Sainati" with the 
acknowledgment of the President of Italy. 
She is also one of the founders of the  NY  
Posthuman Research Group. 
 Elisa Fiore  is a PhD candid ate at the Institute for 
Historical, Literary and Cultural Studies at 
Radboud University, Nijmegen. Her research 
areas are femin ist posthu man ism, sensory 
studies and memory studies. She has worked 
as personal assist ant of Professor Rosi 
Braidotti at the Centre for the Humanities at 
Utrecht University. Before that, she received 
her Research Master degree in Gender and 
Ethnicity, also from Utrecht University. 
 Maja and Reuben Fowkes  are art histor i ans, 
curat ors and co- direct ors of the Translocal 
Institute for Contemporary Art, a centre for 
transna tional research into East European 
art and ecology based in Budapest that 
oper ates across the discip lin ary bound ar ies 
of art history, contem por ary art and 
ecolo gical thought. Maja Fowkes is the 
author of  The Green Bloc: Neo- avant-garde 
Art and Ecology under Socialism (2015) and 
together they published  River Ecologies: 
Contemporary Art and Environmental 
Humanities on the Danube (2015). 
 Anselm Franke  is a Berlin- based curator and 
author. He has been the head of the 
Department of Visual Arts and Film at Haus 
der Kulturen der Welt since 2013. He was 
the chief curator of the Taipei Biennial in 
2014. His exhib i tion project  Animism was 
shown from 2009 until 2014 in collab or a-
tion with various part ners in Antwerp, Berne, 
Vienna, Berlin, New York, Shenzhen, Seoul 
and Beirut. Franke received his doctor ate 
from Goldsmiths College, London. 
 Matthew Fuller  is Professor of Cultural Studies 
and Director of the Centre for Cultural 
Studies, Goldsmiths, University of London. 
With Usman Haque, he is co- author of  Urban 
Versioning System v1.0 ( ALNY ) and with 
scramble for resources in the Sahel region, 
the polit ics of portrayal of border land 
viol ence, war games, state less demo cracy 
and Dutch xeno pho bia. A fully revised 
second edition of her  Theories of Violent 
Confl ict was published in 2017. 
 Rick Dolphijn  is a philo sopher working at Utrecht 
University (Humanities). He writes between 
art and contem por ary theory and has a 
strong interest in all forms of activ ism and 
ecology. His writ ings include  Foodscapes 
(2004),  New Materialism (with Iris van der 
Tuin, 2012) and  This Deleuzian Century (ed. 
with Rosi Braidotti, 2016). 
 Wander Eikelboom  is a writer and cultural critic 
with an interest in contin ental philo sophy, 
parti cip at ory media cultures and the 
embod ied exper i ences of inter act ive media. 
He reads media studies at the Academy for 
Multimedia and Communication Design 
( CMD ) in Breda ( NL ) and is editor in chief of 
the magazine  Void . He is the project leader, 
researcher, writer and editor in chief of the 
Sense of Smell project that resul ted in the 
 Sense of Smell book (2014) and  Famous 
Death install a tion. 
 M. Beatrice Fazi  is Research Fellow in Digital 
Humanities and Computational Culture at 
the Sussex Humanities Lab (University of 
Sussex,  UK ). Her research explores 
ques tions at the inter sec tion of philo sophy, 
science and tech no logy. Her current work 
invest ig ates the limits of formal reas on ing in 
rela tion to compu ta tion. This work aims to 
offer a re- concep tu al iz a tion of contin gency 
within formal axio matic systems vis-à- vis 
tech nos cientifi c notions of incom plete ness 
and incom put ab il ity. 
 Francesca Ferrando , PhD in Philosophy,  MA in 
Gender Studies, is a philo sopher of the 
posthu man; she teaches Philosophy at  NYU , 
Program of Liberal Studies. Dr Ferrando has 
published extens ively on the topic of post- 
and transhuman ism. The Italian edition of 
her book  Philosophical Posthumanism and
CONTRIBUTORS 
xix
psycho ana lysis and theor ies of subjectiv ity. 
His forth com ing book is  The Wall or the Door: 
German Realism around 1800 . 
 David Theo Goldberg  is the Director of the 
University of California Humanities Research 
Institute and Executive Director of the Digital 
Media and Learning Research Hub. He is a 
Professor in the depart ments of Comparative 
Literature and Anthropology at the University 
of California, Irvine. He has published twenty 
books, includ ing the co- authored  The Future 
of Thinking: Learning Institutions in the 
Digital Age (2009), and the co- edited 
 Between Humanities and the Digital (2015). 
His most recent book is  Are We All Postracial 
Yet? (2015). 
 Dan Goodley  is Professor of Disability Studies 
and Education at the University of Sheffi eld. 
Recent texts include  Dis/ability Studies 
(2014) and  Disability Studies (2011). His 
work engages crit ical studies of ableism and 
disab lism to inter rog ate the gains and losses 
of those working at the dis/ability complex. 
 Tobijn de Graauw  is Director of the Justice 
Leadership Group. Her back ground is in 
polit ical philo sophy, and during her  MA  at 
Utrecht University she special ized in global 
justice and human rights. Previously she 
worked at the Centre for the Humanities, 
Utrecht University, where she led research 
projects and activ it ies in the fi elds of reli gion in 
the public sphere, cultural citizen ship and 
envir on mental human it ies. She is a co- editor 
of the book  Transformations of Religion and 
the Public Sphere: Postsecular Publics (2014). 
 Jack Halberstam  is Professor of American 
Studies and Ethnicity, Gender Studies and 
Comparative Literature at the University of 
Southern California. He is the author of fi ve 
books includ ing  Skin Shows: Gothic Horror 
and the Technology of Monsters (1995), 
 Female Masculinity (1998),  In A Queer Time 
and Place (2005),  The Queer Art of Failure 
(2011) and  Gaga Feminism: Sex, Gender, 
and the End of Normal (2012). 
Andrew Goffey, of  Evil Media ( MIT ), editor of 
 Software Studies , a lexicon ( MIT ) and 
co- editor of the journal  Computational 
Culture . He is involved in a number of 
projects in art, media and soft ware and is 
the author of the forth com ing  How to Sleep, 
in Art, Biology and Culture (Bloomsbury). 
 Jennifer Gabrys  is Professor in the Department of 
Sociology at Goldsmiths, University of London, 
and Principal Investigator on the  ERC -funded 
project, Citizen Sense. She is author of a 
study on elec tronic waste,  Digital Rubbish: A 
Natural History of Electronics (2011) and a 
study on envir on mental sensing,  Program 
Earth: Environmental Sensing Technology and 
the Making of a Computational Planet  
(2016). Her work can be found at citizen-
sense.net and jennifer gabrys.net. 
 Gary Genosko  is a Professor at the University of 
Ontario’s Institute of Technology. He has held 
a Canada Research Chair, and visit ing 
professor posi tions at University of New 
South Wales, University of Sydney, and 
University of Toronto. Genosko works on 
commu nic a tion and cultural theory, 
subcul tures in the digital under ground, and 
whis tleblowers. His philo soph ical interests 
includes the philo sophy of Félix Guattari. 
 Ine Gevers  is a curator, writer and activ ist. 
Among her exhib i tions and public a tions are 
 Niet Normaal: Difference on Display (Beurs 
van Berlage, Amsterdam, 2010; Berlin, 
2011; Liverpool, 2012) and  Yes Naturally: 
How art saves the world (Gemeentemuseum, 
The Hague, 2013), propos ing a non- anthro-
po centric world view in order to become 
ecolo gic ally intel li gent. Her large- scale 
inter na tional exhib i tion  Hacking Habitat was 
displayed in the former prison of the city of 
Utrecht in 2016. 
 Tom Giesbers  is a philo sopher at Utrecht 
University who special izes in German 
post-Kantian philo sophy and contem por ary 
French philo sophy. His research interests 
include, but are not limited to, realism,
xx 
CONTRIBUTORS
Sciences, and a teacher at the ‘We Are Here 
Academy’, an unof fi  cial academy for 
undoc u mented migrants in the Netherlands. 
His most recent public a tion is a co- edited 
volume (with Asja Szafraniec)  Words: 
Religious Language Matters (2016). 
 Stefan Herbrechter  is a freel ance academic, a 
research fellow at Coventry University,  UK , 
and Privatdozent at Heidelberg University. He 
is the exec ut ive editor (with I. Callus) of the 
Brill series  Critical Posthumanisms , and 
co- director (with I. Callus and M. Rossini) of 
the Critical Posthumanism Network. His 
books include  Posthumanism: A Critical 
Analysis (2013),  Posthumanist 
Shakespeares (2012) and  Cy-Borges: 
Memories of the Posthuman in the Work of 
Jorge Luis Borges (2005). 
 Helen Hester  is Associate Professor of Media 
and Communication at the University of West 
London. She is the author of  Beyond Explicit: 
Pornography and the Displacement of Sex 
(2014) the co- editor of the collec tions  Fat 
Sex: New Directions in Theory and Activism 
(2015) and  Dea ex Machina (2015), and a 
member of the inter na tional femin ist 
collect ive Laboria Cuboniks. 
 Maria Hlavajova  is the founder of  BAK , basis voor 
actuele kunst, Utrecht and has been its artistic 
director since 2000, and is also artistic 
director of  FORMER  WEST (2008–16), which 
she initi ated and developed as an inter na-
tional collab or at ive research, educa tion, 
public a tion and exhib i tion under tak ing. 
Hlavajova has organ ized numer ous projects at 
 BAK and beyond, includ ing, most recently, the 
series  Future Vocabularies (2014–16) and 
 New World Academy with artist Jonas Staal 
( 2013 , ongoing). 
 Aud Sissel Hoel  is Professor of Media Studies 
and Visual Culture at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology. Her 
research concerns the role of images and 
tools in know ledge and think ing, focus ing on 
photo graphy, scientifi c instru ments, 
 Patrick Hanafi n  is Professor of Law at Birkbeck 
Law School, University of London, where he 
also directs the Law School’s Centre for Law 
and the Humanities. His research engages 
with ques tions of law and the biopol it ical, 
law and liter at ure, human rights and 
citizen ship, and the construc tion of 
community and iden tity. His books include 
 After Cosmopolitanism (with R. Braidotti and 
B. Blaagaard) (2013),  Deleuze and Law: 
Forensic Futures (with R. Braidiotti and 
C. Colebrook) (2009) and  Conceiving Life: 
Reproductive Politics and the Law in 
Contemporary Italy (2007). 
 Donna J. Haraway  is a Distinguished Professor 
Emerita in the History of Consciousness 
Department and Feminist Studies Department 
at the University of California, Santa Cruz. She 
is the author of numer ous books and essays 
that bring together ques tions of science 
and femin ism, such as ‘A Cyborg Manifesto’ 
(1985), ‘Situated Knowledges’ (1988), 
 Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The 
Reinvention of Nature (1991),  Modest_
Witness@Second_Millennium.
FemaleMan©Meets_OncoMouse™: 
Feminism and Technoscience (1997) and 
 When Species Meet (2008). 
 Alison Harvey  is a Lecturer in Media and 
Communication at the University of Leicester 
in the United Kingdom. Her research focuses 
on issues of inclus iv ity and access ib il ity in 
digital culture. Her work has appeared in 
 Social Media & Society ,  Feminist Media 
Studies and  Information, Communication & 
Society . Her book,  Gender, Age, and Digital 
Games in the Domestic Context , was 
published by Routledge in 2015. 
 Ernst van den Hemel  is a scholar of reli gious 
studies and liter at ure at the Meertens 
Institute and a lecturer at the Religious 
Studies depart ment at Utrecht University. He 
is also a secret ary/researcher for the 
Theology and Religious Studies foresight 
commit tee of the Royal Dutch Academy of
CONTRIBUTORS 
xxi
 Heather Houser  is Associate Professor of English 
at the University of Texas at Austin. Her public 
a tions include  Ecosickness in Contemporary 
U.S. Fiction: Environment and Affect (2014), 
and essays in  American Literary History , 
 American Literature ,  Los Angeles Review of 
Books ,  Modern Fiction Studies and  Public 
Culture , among others. Her current project, 
‘Environmental Culture of the Infowhelm’, 
invest ig ates the aesthet ics of inform a tion 
manage ment in envir on mental culture. 
 Pierre Huyghe (born 1962 in Paris) lives and 
works in Paris and New York. He studied at 
the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Arts 
Décoratifs in Paris. He has had numer ous 
inter na tional solo exhib i tions at such venues 
as the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
(2015), Los Angeles County Museum of Art 
and Museum Ludwig, Cologne (2014) and 
the Centre Pompidou, Paris (2013–14), 
among others. 
 Serenella Iovino  is Professor of Comparative 
Literature at the University of Turin. Her recent 
public a tions include  Ecocriticism and Italy: 
Ecology, Resistance, and Liberation (2016; 
Winner of the  AAIS Book Prize) and  Ecologia 
letter aria: Una strategia di soprav vivenza  
(2nd ed. 2015). With Serpil Oppermann, she 
is co- editor of  Material Ecocriticism (2014) 
and  Environmental Humanities: Voices from 
the Anthropocene  (2017). 
 Brandon Jones  is a PhD candid ate in English 
Literature at the University of Illinois, 
Urbana-Champaign. His disser ta tion research 
focuses on post- war American fi ction, 
envir on ment al ism and utopia. He has 
published essays in the  Journal of 
Consciousness Studies and  O-Zone: A Journal 
of Object-Oriented Studies on ecology and 
conscious ness in the works of Alfred North 
Whitehead, Karen Barad and Richard Powers. 
 Eileen A. Joy  is a special ist in Old English liter ary 
studies and cultural studies, as well as a 
para- academic rogue drone- strike machine, 
with interests in poetry and poetics, 
meas ure ment, medical imaging and 
visu al iz a tion. Hoel’s public a tions cover a 
wide range of topics on the over lap ping 
fi elds of visual studies, science studies and 
media philo sophy. 
 Ingrid Hoelzl  is an image theorist and 
performance artist, currently Assistant 
Professor at the School or Creative Media, 
Hong Kong. She is the author of a monograph 
on the theory of photographic self-portraiture, 
 Der Autoporträtistische Pakt  (2008) and (with 
Rémi Marie) of  Softimage: Towards a New 
Theory of the Digital Image  (2015) which 
investigates the algorithmic paradigm of the 
image leading to the thesis of the image as 
program. She is currently working on a new 
book project titled  Postimage: The New 
Ecology of Vision , which addresses the 
dissolution of the image in machine vision 
and neuroscience from the perspective of 
posthumanism and ecophenomenology. 
 Tom Holert  is an art histor ian, critic, curator and 
artist. A former editor of  Texte zur Kunst and 
 Spex , Holert is Honorary Professor of Art 
Theory and Cultural Studies at the Academy 
of Fine Arts Vienna. Alongside his writ ings on 
contem por ary and late modern ist art in 
journ als he has (co-)authored books on 
visual culture, polit ics, war, mobil ity, glamour 
and the govern ment al ity of the present. 
Currently his research focuses on ques tions 
of art and know ledge, and the gene a lo gies of 
contem por ary art’s ventures into know ledge 
produc tion and pedagogy. 
 Erich Hörl  is Full Professor of Media Culture at 
the Institute of Culture and Aesthetics of 
Digital Media ( ICAM ), Leuphana University of 
Lüneburg, Germany. His current research 
interests concern the devel op ment of a 
general ecology of media and tech no lo gies as 
well as a critique of the process of cyber net i-
ciz a tion of all life forms and modes of 
exist ence since around 1950. He has a 
special expert ise in Simondon Studies and 
Heidegger Studies as well as Guattari Studies.
xxii 
CONTRIBUTORS
mech an ics and organ ics. By doing research 
on precisely these issues, she wants to 
chal lenge nature, creat ing it anew. 
 Goda Klumbyt e˙ is a PhD candidate at the 
University of Kassel, Germany, within a 
research group Gender/Diversity in 
Informatics Systems. Her research engages 
femin ist tech nos cience, new media studies 
and posthu man ism. Her work has been 
published in  Everyday Feminist Research 
Praxis (eds Leurs and Olivieri, 2015) and  Fat 
Sex: New Directions in Theory and Activism 
(eds Walters and Hester, 2015). 
 Katerina Kolozova  is Director and Senior 
Researcher at the Institute of Social 
Sciences and Humanities, Skopje and 
Professor of Philosophy, Gender Studies and 
Sociological Theory at the University 
American College Skopje. Her publications 
include The  Cut of The Real: Subjectivity in 
Poststructuralist Philosophy  (2014) and 
 Toward a Radical Metaphysics of Socialism: 
Marx and Laruelle  (2015). 
 Vasilis Kostakis  is Senior Research Fellow at 
Tallinn University of Technology. He is also 
Founder of the P2P Lab and a core member 
of the P2P Foundation. 
 Karen Kramer gradu ated with a  BFA  from 
Parsons School of Design, New York, in 
2003 and concen trated, for a number of 
years, on a career in graphic design. In 
 MFA  in Fine Art at Goldsmiths, University of 
London. Since complet ing her fi nal exhib i tion 
in 2013 she has exhib ited inter na tion ally 
and taken part in a range of studio 
resid en cies. In 2015 she was a co- recip i ent 
of the Jerwood/ FVU awards, culmin at ing in 
the exhib i tion  Borrowed Time  at Jerwood 
Space, London. 
 Carolyn Lau  is a doctoral candid ate in English 
(Literary Studies) at The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong. She was a Visiting Research 
Fellow at the Center for the Humanities at 
Utrecht University in 2015. 
histori ography, ethics, affects, embod i ments, 
queer studies, the polit ics of friend ship, 
spec u lat ive realism, object- oriented onto logy, 
the ecolo gical and the post/human. She is 
the Lead Ingenitor of the  BABEL Working 
Group and Co-Editor of  postme di eval: a 
journal of medi eval cultural studies . 
 Birgit Mara Kaiser teaches Comparative 
Literature at Utrecht University, The 
Netherlands. She is the author of  Figures of 
Simplicity: Sensation and Thinking in Kleist 
and Melville (2011); she edited (with Lorna 
Burns)  Postcolonial Literatures and Deleuze: 
Colonial Pasts, Differential Futures (2012) 
and  Singularity and Transnational Poetics 
(2015). Together with Kathrin Thiele she 
founded and coordin ates the 
Interdisciplinary Network for the Critical 
Humanities Terra Critica. 
 Vicki Kirby  is Professor of Sociology in the 
School of Social Sciences, The University of 
New South Wales in Sydney. She is the 
author of  Quantum Anthropologies: Life at 
Large ,  Judith Butler: Live Theory and  Telling 
Flesh: The Substance of the Corporeal . She 
has articles forth com ing in  Derrida Today , 
 Parallax , and in David Woods et al. (eds), 
 Eco-Deconstruction (Fordham). 
 Eben Kirksey  is Associate Professor of 
Anthropology at Deakin University in 
Melbourne, Australia. He has published 
three books with Duke University Press: 
 Freedom in Entangled Worlds: West 
Papua and the Global Architecture of Power  
(2012),  Emergent Ecologies  (2015), and 
an edited collection  The Multispecies Salon  
(2014). 
 Tove Kjellmark  is an artist living and working in 
Stockholm, Sweden. She has received 
numer ous grants and has had many solo 
exhib i tions over the years. In her work she 
searches for Another Nature: a nature that 
refuses to accept a differ ence between 
tech no lo gical and natural forces, between 
human life and animal life, between
CONTRIBUTORS 
xxiii
 Geert Lovink  is a Dutch media theorist, Internet 
critic and author of  Uncanny Networks  
(2002),  Dark Fiber  (2002),  My First 
Recession  (2003),  Zero Comments  (2007), 
 Networks Without a Cause (2012) and 
 Social Media Abyss  (2016). In 2004 he 
founded the Institute of Network Cultures at 
the Amsterdam University of Applied 
Sciences. His centre organizes conferences, 
publications and research networks such as 
Video Vortex (online video), Unlike Us 
(alternatives in social media), Critical Point 
of View (Wikipedia), Society of the Query 
(the culture of search), MoneyLab (internet-
based revenue models in the arts). Recent 
projects deal with digital publishing and the 
future of art criticism. He also teaches at the 
European Graduate School (Saas-Fee/
Malta) where he supervises PhD students. 
 Nina Lykke  is Professor of Gender Studies, 
Linköping University, Sweden, co- director of 
 GEX cel International Collegium for Advanced 
Transdisciplinary Gender Studies and 
director of the International Research 
School, InterGender. She has published 
extens ively within femin ist cultural studies, 
includ ing tech nos cience studies, among 
others  Cosmodolphins (2000) and  Feminist 
Studies (2010). Her current research is a 
queer feminist, autophenomeno graphic and 
cultural theor et ical analysis of cancer, death 
and mourn ing. 
 Wietske Maas  is a cultural worker and an artist 
research ing urban ecolo gies. Based in 
Amsterdam since 2005, Wietske combines 
artistic pursuits with work as a produ cer and 
curator for the European Cultural Foundation 
and as researcher, project manager and 
managing editor for the conclud ing phase of 
 FORMER  WEST (2014–16). 
 Patricia MacCormack  is Professor of Continental 
Philosophy at Anglia Ruskin University, 
Cambridge. She has published extens ively on 
Continental Philosophy, Feminism, Queer 
Theory, Posthuman Theory, Animal Rights, art 
 Rebecca Lawthom  is Professor of Community 
Psychology at Manchester Metropolitan 
University. Her work engages at the inter sec-
tions of femin ism, disab il ity and migra tion. 
Publications include  Community Psychology  
(2011, with Kagan, Burton and Duckett) and 
 Qualitative Methods in Psychology: A 
Research Guide (2012, with Banister, Bunn, 
Burman, Daniels, Duckett, Parker, Runswick-
Cole, Sixsmith and Goodley). 
 Koen Leurs is an Assistant Professor in Gender 
and Postcolonial Studies at Utrecht University. 
Leurs is critical Internet researcher working on 
migration, diaspora, gender, race, class, 
urbanity and youth culture. Recent 
publications include the co-edited anthology 
 Everyday Feminist Research Practices  (2014), 
the monograph  Digital Passages: Migrant 
Youth 2.0  (2015) and an article on ‘Feminist 
data studies’ that appeared in  Feminist 
Review  (2017). Currently he is co-editing the 
 SAGE Handbook of Media and Migration . 
 Armin Linke was born in 1966 and lives in Milan 
and Berlin. As a photo grapher and 
fi lm- maker he combines a range of 
contem por ary image- processing tech no lo-
gies in order to blur the borders between 
fi ction and reality. His artistic prac tice is 
concerned with differ ent possib il it ies of 
dealing with photo graphic archives and their 
respect ive mani fest a tions, as well as with the 
inter re la tions and trans form at ive powers 
between urban, archi tec tural or spatial 
func tions and the human beings inter act ing 
with these envir on ments. 
 Kirsty Liddiard  is currently a Research Fellow 
within the Centre for the Study of Childhood 
and Youth, in the School of Education at the 
University of Sheffi eld. Prior to this, she 
became the inaug ural Ethel Louise 
Armstrong Postdoctoral Fellow at the School 
of Disability Studies, Ryerson University, 
Toronto, Canada. Her work centres on 
disab lism and ableism; and gender, sexu al ity 
and intim ate citizen ship.
xxiv 
CONTRIBUTORS
in progress can be found on his blog,  The 
Bookfi sh ( www.steve mentz.com ). 
 Sandro Mezzadra  teaches polit ical theory at the 
University of Bologna and is adjunct fellow at 
the Institute for Culture and Society, Western 
Sydney University. With Brett Neilson, he is 
the author of  Border as Method, or, the 
Multiplication of Labor (Duke UP, 2013). He 
is an active parti cipant in the ‘post- work er ist’ 
debates and one of the founders of the 
website Euronomade. 
 The  MTL Collective, Nitasha Dhillon and Amin 
Husain, is a collab or a tion that joins research, 
aesthet ics and action in its prac tice. Nitasha 
is a visual artist based in New York and New 
Delhi, and is currently a PhD candid ate at 
the Department of Media Study, State 
University of New York at Buffalo. Amin is a 
Palestinian–American lawyer, artist, and 
organ izer based in New York. He prac tised 
law for fi ve years before trans ition ing to art, 
study ing at the School of the International 
Center of Photography and Whitney 
Independent Study Program. Amin currently 
teaches at the Gallatin and Steinhardt 
Schools at New York University and Pratt’s 
Graduate Writing Program. 
 Brett Neilson  is Research Director at the 
Institute for Culture and Society, Western 
Sydney University. With Sandro Mezzadra, he 
is author of  Border as Method, or, the 
Multiplication of Labor  (Duke University Press, 
2013). With Ned Rossiter, he coordin ates the 
tricon tin ental research project Logistical 
Worlds: Infrastructure, Software, Labour 
(http://logist ic al worlds.org). 
 Astrida Neimanis  is a lecturer at the Department 
of Gender and Cultural Studies, University of 
Sydney. She is Associate Editor of the journal 
 Environmental Humanities , a Key Researcher 
with the Sydney Environment Institute and 
co- convenor of the  Composting: Feminisms 
and the Environmental Humanities  reading 
group. She is also a found ing member of The 
Seed Box: A Mistra–Formas Environmental 
and horror fi lm. She is the co- editor of  Deleuze 
and the Schizoanalysis of Cinema (2008), the 
editor of  The Animal Catalyst: Toward Ahuman 
Theory (2014) and the author of  Cinesexuality 
(2008) and  Posthuman Ethics (2014). 
 Jeffrey Scott Marchand  is a PhD student at the 
University of Arlington at Texas. His research 
interests include posthu man ecocriti cism, 
race/post co lo nial studies and contem por ary 
cultural studies. His disser ta tion will focus on 
the possib il ity of reading various multi me dia 
pop culture arte facts as spec u lat ive 
imagin ings of affi rm at ive ecolo gical, racial 
and queer futures in the age of the 
Anthropocene. 
 Nikita Mazurov  is a data liber a tion enthu si ast 
and postdoc toral researcher working with the 
Living Archives project at Malmö University, 
looking at how to protect archive parti cipants 
by making archives unre li able. He previ ously 
completed a doctoral project at Goldsmiths 
which developed a hacker meth od o logy of 
praxis combin ing counter- forensics with 
Stirnerian egoism. Interests include both 
privacy and piracy; specifi c ally how to 
engage in the latter while assur ing the 
former. 
 Stuart McLean  is Professor of Anthropology 
and Global Studies at the University of 
Minnesota. He is the author of  The Event 
and its Terrors: Ireland, Famine, Modernity 
(2004) and  Fictionalizing Anthropology: 
Encounters and Fabulations at the Edges of 
the Human  (2017) and the editor (with 
Anand Pandian) of  Crumpled Paper Boat: 
Experiments in Ethnographic Writing 
(2017). 
 Steve Mentz  is Professor of English at St John’s 
University in New York City. His most recent 
books include  Shipwreck Modernity: 
Ecologies of Globalization, 1550–1719 
(2015) and  Oceanic New York (2015). His 
work in the blue human it ies also includes  At 
the Bottom of Shakespeare’s Ocean (2009) 
and numer ous articles and chapters. Works
CONTRIBUTORS 
xxv
 The Otolith Group is an award- winning artist- led 
collect ive and organ iz a tion founded by 
Anjalika Sagar and Kodwo Eshun in 2002. It 
creates fi lms, install a tions and perform ances 
that are driven by extens ive research into the 
histor ies of science fi ction and the legacies 
of transna tion al ism. The Otolith Group was 
short l is ted for the Turner Prize in 2010. 
 Susanna Paasonen is professor of Media 
Studies at the University of Turku, Finland. 
With an interest in studies of popular culture, 
affect and media theory, she is most recently 
the author of  Carnal Resonance: Affect and 
Online Pornography (2011) as well as 
co- editor of  Working with Affect in Feminist 
Readings: Disturbing Differences (2010) 
and  Networked Affect (2015). 
 Trevor Paglen’s work delib er ately blurs lines 
between science, contem por ary art, 
journ al ism and other discip lines to construct 
unfa mil iar yet metic u lously researched ways 
to see and inter pret the world around us. His 
visual work has been exhib ited at the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Tate 
Modern, London, The Walker Arts Center, 
Minneapolis and others. His most recent 
book,  The Last Pictures  (2012) is a 
medit a tion on the inter sec tions of deep- time, 
polit ics and art. 
 Neni Panourgiá  is an anthropologist, Senior 
Research Fellow at the Institute for 
Comparative Literature and Society at 
Columbia University, Director of the Project 
on Aging, and affi liated faculty at the 
Psychology Department. Through the Prison 
Program at Columbia University she teaches 
at Sing Sing, the maximum-security prison in 
Upstate New York.  Her work engages many 
registers, lexicons, and disciplines and is 
concerned with questions of epistemology, 
critical theory, critical medical studies, 
humanism and anthropism, social and 
political exception and excision, sites of 
dissonance, complete and austere 
institutions. She has situated her research in 
Humanities Collaboratory. Her fi rst 
monograph is  Bodies of Water: Posthuman 
Feminist Phenomenology  (2017). 
 Jenna Ng is Anniversary Lecturer in Film and 
Interactive Media at the University of York, 
 UK . She works on issues inter sect ing digital 
and visual culture, with interests also in the 
philo sophy of tech no logy, the posthuman, 
compu ta tional culture and the digital human-
it ies. She is the editor  of Understanding 
Machinima: Essays on Filmmaking in Virtual 
Worlds (Bloomsbury 2013), and is currently 
working on a monograph,  Undoing the 
Screen: Surface, Space and the Digital 
Image  (Palgrave Macmillan). She was 
previously a Newton Trust/Liverhulme Early 
Career Fellow at the University of Cambridge. 
 Henk Oosterling  is Associate Professor of 
Philosophy of Man and Culture at the Faculty 
of Philosophy of Erasmus University 
Rotterdam. By translating the results of his 
academic research on intermediately 
and ecophilosophy in urban policies 
Dr Oosterling plays an active role in the city 
of Rotterdam as a stra tegic consultant for 
urban and educational innovation. He is the 
initi ator and general director of ‘Rotterdam 
Skillcity’, a bottom-up educational 
intervention in primary and secondary 
schools in the South of Rotterdam, 
implementing eco-social skills focused on 
sustainable craftsmanship in school 
curricula. See: http://www.vakmanstad.nl. 
 Serpil Oppermann  is a full professor in the 
Department of English Language and 
Literature at Hacettepe University, Ankara. 
Her most recent public a tions include 
 International Perspectives in Feminist 
Ecocriticism (2013), co- edited with Greta 
Gaard and Simon Estok, and  Material 
Ecocriticism (2014) and  Environmental 
Humanities: Voices from the Anthropocene 
 (2017), co- edited with Serenella Iovino. She 
has also edited  New Voices in International 
Ecocriticism (2015).
xxvi 
CONTRIBUTORS
Digital Culture Unit, Goldsmiths, University of 
London. Her research draws on contin ental 
philo sophy to invest ig ate onto lo gical and 
epistem o lo gical trans form a tions driven by 
the func tion of tech no logy in culture, 
aesthet ics and polit ics. Her books include 
 Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Biotechnology and 
the Mutations of Desire  (2004) and 
 Contagious Architecture. Computation, 
Aesthetics and Space (2013). 
 Matteo Pasquinelli  ( MA , Bologna; PhD, London) 
is a philo sopher and Professor in Media 
Theory at the University of Arts and Design, 
Karlsruhe. Previously he has taught at the 
Pratt Institute, New York. He wrote  Animal 
Spirits: A Bestiary of the Commons (2008) 
and has edited the antho lo gies  Gli algor itmi 
del capitale (2014) and  Alleys of Your Mind: 
Augmented Intelligence and its Traumas 
(2015) among others. 
 Patricia Pisters  is Professor of Film at the 
Department of Media Studies of the 
University of Amsterdam and director of the 
Amsterdam School of Cultural Analysis 
( ASCA ). She is one of the found ing editors 
of the Open Access journal  Necsus: 
European Journal of Media Studies and 
author of  The Neuro-Image: A Film-
Philosophy of Digital Screen Culture (2012). 
 Sandra Ponzanesi is Professor of Gender and 
Postcolonial Studies, Department of Media 
and Culture Studies/Graduate Gender 
Programme, Utrecht University and Head of 
Humanities at Utrecht University College, the 
Netherlands. She is the author of  Paradoxes 
of Postcolonial Culture (2004) and  The 
Postcolonial Cultural Industry (2014), editor 
of  Gender, Globalisation and Violence. 
Postcolonial Confl ict Zones (2014) and 
co- editor of  Postcolonial Transitions in 
Europe. Contexts, Practices and Politics 
(2016), among others. 
 Helen Pritchard  is an artist and researcher. Her 
work is inter dis cip lin ary and brings together 
the fi elds of compu ta tional aesthet ics, 
hospitals, prisons, camps, schools. She has 
published on theory of anthropology, 
ethnographic methods, art, architecture, 
political histories, and intimate 
ethnographies. Her numerous publications 
have appeared in  American Ethnologist, 
American Anthropologist, angelaki; 
Anthropology and Humanism, 
Anthropological Theory, Documenta, Mousse, 
Naked Punch . Her award-winning books 
include  Fragments of Death, Fables of 
Identity. An Athenian Anthropography 
(1995);  Ethnographica Moralia. Experiments 
in Interpretive Anthropology  (2008); 
 Dangerous Citizens. The Greek Left and the 
Terror of the State  (2009); and a new 
edition of Paul Radin’s  Primitive Man as 
Philosopher  (2017). 
 Dimitris Papadopoulos  is a Reader in Sociology 
and Organisation at the School of 
Management, University of Leicester. His work 
in science and tech no logy studies, social 
theory and soci ology of social change has 
been published in numer ous journ als and 
several mono graphs, includ ing the forth com-
ing  Experimental Politics: Technoscience and 
More Than Social Movements (Duke 
University Press),  Escape Routes: Control and 
Subversion in the 21st Century (2008) and 
 Analysing Everyday Experience: Social 
Research and Political Change (2006). 
 Jussi Parikka  is a media theor ist, writer and 
Professor in Technological Culture and 
Aesthetics at Winchester School of Art, 
University of Southampton. He has published 
widely on digital culture, media theory, visual 
culture and media archae ology. Parikka’s 
books include  Digital Contagions: A Media 
Archaeology of Computer Viruses (2007, 
2nd ed. 2016),  Insect Media (2010),  A 
Geology of Media (2015) and  The 
Anthrobscene (2014). 
 Luciana Parisi  is Reader in Cultural Theory, Chair 
of the PhD programme at the Centre for 
Cultural Studies, and co- director of the
CONTRIBUTORS 
xxvii
theory and polit ics of soft ware, more 
partic u larly on the role of algorithms in 
social processes and the produc tion of 
know ledge. Part of that is working with and 
build ing digital methods. He is currently 
writing a book on the history and cultural 
signi fi c ance of inform a tion processing. 
 Jara Rocha  is a cultural medi ator, devel op ing 
educa tional and research programs at Bau 
Design College of Barcelona. She studies 
present cultures and learns through 
transfeminist prac tices, linking both formal 
and non- formal ways of attend ing to matter. 
She regu larly collab or ates with Femke 
Snelting on the inter faces between 
so-called-bodies, repres ent a tion and 
tech no logy. 
 David Roden  has worked for the Open University 
as a lecturer and asso ci ate lecturer. His 
research has addressed the rela tion ship 
between decon struc tion and analytic 
philo sophy, philo soph ical natur al ism, the 
meta phys ics of sound and posthu man ism. 
His public a tions include a contri bu tion to the 
Springer Frontiers volume  The Singularity 
Hypothesis: A Scientifi c and Philosophical 
Assessment . His book  Posthuman Life: 
Philosophy at the Edge of the Human was 
published in 2014. 
 Ned Rossiter  is Professor of Communication in 
the Institute for Culture and Society and 
teaches in the School of Humanities and 
Communication Arts at Western Sydney 
University. His most recent book is  Software, 
Infrastructure, Labor: A Media Theory of 
Logistical Nightmares (2016). 
 Katherine Runswick-Cole is Senior Research 
Fellow in Disability Studies and Psychology 
at Manchester Metropolitan University,  UK . 
Her research and public a tions focus on the 
lives of disabled chil dren and their famil ies, 
includ ing  Disabled Children’s Childhood 
Studies (2013, edited with Tillie Curran) and 
 Approaching Disability: Critical Issues and 
Perspectives (2014, with Rebecca Mallett). 
geography and femin ist tech nos cience. 
Together with Jennifer Gabrys she created the 
Citizen Sense Kit for monit or ing and taking 
action on pollu tion from natural gas extrac tion. 
She is a researcher on Citizen Sense funded 
by the European Research Council, in the 
Department of Sociology at Goldsmiths, 
University of London, and a PhD candid ate in 
the School of Geography, Queen Mary 
University of London. 
 John Protevi  is a Professor of French Studies at 
Louisiana State University. He special izes in 
Deleuze and science, with a partic u lar 
interest in geophilo sophy and affect ive 
neur os cience. His most recent book is  Life, 
War, Earth: Deleuze and the Sciences 
(2013); previ ous books include  Political 
Affect (2009),  Deleuze and Geophilosophy 
(2004) and  Political Physics (2001). He 
is also found ing editor of the book series 
 New Directions: Cognitive Science and 
Continental Philosophy . 
 Christine Quinan  is Assistant Professor of 
Gender Studies in the Department of Media 
and Culture Studies at Utrecht University. 
Christine’s teach ing and research interests 
include post co lo nial studies, trans studies, 
queer theory, liter ary and fi lm studies, and 
femin ist/queer pedagogy. 
 Andrej Radman  has been teach ing design and 
theory courses at  TU Delft Faculty of 
Architecture since 2004. A gradu ate of the 
Zagreb School of Architecture in Croatia, he 
is a licensed archi tect and recip i ent of the 
Croatian Architects Association Annual Award 
for Housing Architecture in 2002. Radman 
received his Master’s and Doctoral Degrees 
from  TU Delft and joined the Architecture 
Theory Section as Assistant Professor in 
2008. He is an editor of the peer- reviewed 
journal for archi tec ture theory  Footprint . 
 Bernhard Rieder  is an asso ci ate professor at the 
Media Studies Department at the University 
of Amsterdam, inter ested in all things digital. 
His research interests focus on the history,
xxviii 
CONTRIBUTORS
interests lie in the area of analyt ical onto logy 
(process onto logy, method of onto logy), 
contem por ary meta phys ics and the history 
of meta phys ics (Wilfrid Sellars, Carnap, 
Leibniz, Hegel, Whitehead), and more 
recently, in confl ict research (value confl icts), 
inter cul tural value studies and philo sophy of 
social robot ics. 
 Shela Sheikh  is Lecturer at the Centre for 
Cultural Studies, Goldsmiths, University of 
London, where she convenes the MA 
Postcolonial Culture and Global Policy. Prior 
to this she was Research Fellow and 
Publications Coordinator on the ERC-funded 
‘Forensic Architecture’ project based in the 
Centre for Research Architecture. She is 
currently working on a monograph about 
martyrdom and testimony in deconstruction, 
and a multi-platform research project around 
colonialism, botany and the politics of 
planting. Within the latter project, she is 
co-ediiting, with Ros Gray, a special issue of 
Third Text entitled ‘The Wretched Earth: 
Botanical Confl icts and Artistic Interventions’ 
(Spring 2018). 
 Tamara Shepherd  is an Assistant Professor in 
the Department of Communication, Media 
and Film at the University of Calgary. She 
studies the femin ist polit ical economy of 
digital culture, looking at labour, policy and 
liter acy in social media, mobile tech no lo gies 
and digital games. She is an edit or ial board 
member of  Social Media + Society , and her 
work has been published in  Convergence , 
 First Monday ,  Triple C and the  Canadian 
Journal of Communication . 
 Andreas Siekmann  is a German visual artist who 
was born in 1961. He has had numer ous 
gallery and museum exhib i tions, includ ing 
at the Museum der Moderne Salzburg 
Rupertinum and at the Croy Nielsen. Several 
works by the artist have been sold at auction, 
includ ing  Trickle Down: The Public Space in 
the Age of its Privatization , sold at Villa 
Grisebach Auctions ‘Third Floor’ in 2014. 
 Audrey Samson  is an artist- researcher in the 
duo  FRAUD and a senior lecturer at the 
University of Greenwich. Her perform at ive 
install a tions explore how memory and 
tech nical objects are both co- determ ined 
and trans formed in the context of networked 
data archiv ing. Samson’s work has been 
presen ted at fest ivals and galler ies 
through out the Asia Pacifi c, Europe, and 
Canada. 
 Harry Sanderson  is a London- based new media 
artist. His prac tice ranges from sound perform-
ances to inter act ive soft ware sculp tures, video 
work and online commis sions. His main focus 
is labour rela tions embed ded in the language 
of visual cultures, and the rela tion ship of 
tech no logy to capit al ism. He gradu ated from 
Central Saint Martins School of Art and Design 
(London) in 2013. 
 Saskia Sassen  is the Robert S. Lynd Professor of 
Sociology and Chair of The Committee on 
Global Thought, Columbia University. She is 
the author of several books and the recip i ent 
of diverse awards and mentions, ranging 
from multiple doctor honoris causa to 
Named lectures and being selec ted for 
various honours lists. Her latest book is 
 Expulsions: When Complex ity Produces 
Elementary Brutalities (2014). 
 Mirko Tobias Schäfer  is Assistant Professor for 
New Media and Digital Culture at the 
University of Utrecht and director of the 
Utrecht Data School. His research interest 
revolves around the socio- polit ical impact of 
media tech no logy. He is co- editor of the 
volume  Digital Material: Tracing New Media 
in Everyday Life and Technology (2009),  The 
Datafi ed Society: Studying Culture through 
Data (2016) and author of  Bastard Culture! 
How User Participation Transforms Cultural 
Production (2011). 
 Johanna Seibt  is a Professor at Aarhus 
University, Denmark, holding a chair in 
Transdisciplinary Process Studies for 
Integrated Social Robotics. Her research
CONTRIBUTORS 
xxix
(2004) and co- author of  Graphic Medicine 
Manifesto (2015), her most recent book is 
 Epigenetic Landscapes: Drawing as 
Metaphor (Duke UP, 2017). 
 Jonas Staal  is an artist who has studied 
monu mental art in Enschede ( NL ) and 
Boston ( USA ). He is currently working on his 
PhD research entitled Art and Propaganda in 
the 21st Century in the Ph DA rts program of 
the University of Leiden. Staal is the founder 
of the artistic and polit ical organ iz a tion New 
World Summit, which devel ops altern at ive 
parlia ments for state less organ iz a tions 
banned from demo cratic discourse and, 
together with  BAK , basis voor actuele kunst, 
Utrecht, of the New World Academy, 
researches the role of art in state less 
polit ical struggle. 
 Karl Steel is Associate Professor of English at 
Brooklyn College and the Graduate Center, 
City University of New York. A medi ev al ist, his 
work concen trates on the history of human 
suprem acy ( How to Make a Human: Violence 
and Animals in the Middle Ages , 2011) and, 
more recently, on ques tions of edib il ity and 
vulner ab il ity, topics he is explor ing through 
studies of medi eval feral chil dren, burial 
prac tices and imagin a tions of the minimal 
life of oysters. 
 Ravi Sundaram  is a Professor at the Centre for 
the Study of Developing Societies ( CSDS ), 
Delhi. In 2000 he founded the Sarai 
programme along with Ravi Vasudevan 
and the Raqs Media Collective. Sundaram 
is the author of  Pirate Modernity: Media 
Urbanism in Delhi (London 2009), and  No 
Limits: Media Studies from India (Delhi, 
2013). His current research looks at the 
worlds of circu la tion after the mobile 
phone, inform a tion fever, ideas of 
trans par ency and secrecy and the 
post co lo nial media event. 
 Jenna Sutela  is an artist whose installations, text 
and sound performances seek to identify 
and react to precarious social and material 
 Stephanie Simon  is a geographer and research 
asso ci ate at the University of Amsterdam. 
Her research crit ic ally inter rog ates every day 
prac tices and spaces of secur ity and the 
ways in which logics of pre- emption and 
resi li ence are nego ti ated in urban and 
transna tional contexts. Her current projects 
are focused on the sens ib il it ies of land scape 
and urban design as spatial medi at ors of 
risk. Her work has been published in 
 Antipode ,  Theory ,  Culture & Society ,  Journal 
of Urban Cultural Studies ,  Social and 
Cultural Geography ,  Security Dialogue and 
 Space and Polity . 
 Anneke Smelik  is Katrien van Munster professor 
of Visual Culture at the Radboud University 
Nijmegen (Netherlands). She has published 
widely in the fi eld of fashion, cinema, 
popular culture and cultural memory. Her 
latest books are  Delft Blue to Denim Blue: 
Contemporary Dutch Fashion  and  Thinking 
Through Fashion: A Guide to Key Theorists . 
She is project leader of the research 
programme: ‘Crafting Wearables; Fashionable 
Technology’ (2013–2018). 
 Femke Snelting is an artist/designer devel op ing 
projects at the inter sec tion of design, 
femin ism and free soft ware. She is a core 
member of Constant, an asso ci ation for arts 
and media that has been active in Brussels, 
Belgium since 1997. Constant gener ates 
among others perform at ive publish ing, 
curat orial processes, poetic soft ware, 
exper i mental research and educa tional 
exper i ments. Together with Jara Rocha they 
regu larly collab or ate on the inter faces 
between gender, repres ent a tion and 
tech no logy. 
 Susan M. Squier is Brill Professor Emerita of 
English and Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality 
Studies at Penn State University and Einstein 
Visiting Professor at the Freie Universität, 
Berlin (2016–19) where she is working on 
the PathoGraphics project with Irmela Marei 
Krüger-Fürhoff. Author of  Liminal Lives
xxx 
CONTRIBUTORS
Age (2004) and the forth com ing 
 Hypersocial: Digital Networks between the 
Market and the Common . 
 Territorial Agency is an inde pend ent organ iz a tion 
that innov at ively promotes and works for 
sustain able territ orial trans form a tions. 
Founded by architects and urbanists 
Ann-Sofi  Rönnskog and John Palmesino, 
it is engaged to strengthen the capa city of 
local and inter na tional communit ies in 
compre hens ive spatial trans form a tion 
manage ment. Projects channel avail able 
spatial resources towards the devel op ment 
of their full poten tial. Territorial Agency works 
for the estab lish ment of instru ments and 
methods for ensur ing higher archi tec tural 
and urban quality in the contem por ary 
territ or ies. 
 Kathrin Thiele  teaches Gender Studies at 
Utrecht University, the Netherlands. She is 
trained as a crit ical theor ist with research 
expert ise in contin ental philo sophy, femin ist 
theor ies of differ ence and (post)human ist 
studies. She has authored  The Thought of 
Becoming: Gilles Deleuze’s Poetics of Life 
(2008) and edited (with Katrin Trüstedt) 
 Happy Days: Lebenswissen nach Cavell 
(2009) and (with Maria Muhle)  Biopolitische 
Konstellationen (2011). Together with Birgit 
Mara Kaiser she founded and co- ordin ates 
the Interdisciplinary Network for the Critical 
Humanities Terra Critica. 
 Christy Tidwell is an Assistant Professor of 
English and Humanities at the South Dakota 
School of Mines and Technology. She has 
published articles in  Interdisciplinary 
Studies in Literature and Environment 
( ISLE ),  Extrapolation ,  Femspec and 
 Americana: The Journal of American Popular 
Culture 1900 to Present , as well as chapters 
in multiple edited collec tions. She is 
currently writing about ecohor ror fi lm. 
 Oxana Timofeeva  is an Assistant Professor at the 
European University at St. Petersburg and a 
Senior Research Fellow at the Institute of 
moments, often in relation to technology. 
Most recently, she has been exploring 
exceedingly complex biological and 
computational systems, ultimately 
unknowable and in a constant state of 
becoming. Sutela has exhibited her work at 
Haus der Kulturen der Welt in Berlin, The 
Institute of Contemporary Arts London, and 
The Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo, 
among others. 
 Alexandra Symons Sutcliffe  is a writer and 
curator whose work focuses on dance, 
performance and techniques of faithful 
reproduction. She is a past participant in the 
Centre for Research Architecture  MA  
programme and the Whitney Independent 
Study Program, she currently works in New 
York and London. 
 Paulo Tavares  is an architect and urbanist based 
in São Paulo whose work deals with the 
relations between confl ict and space. 
Spanning various media and conceptual 
formats, his design, visual arts and writing 
work have been published and exhibited in 
different contexts and locations worldwide. 
He was a visiting scholar at the School of 
Architecture at Princeton and Cornel 
University, and prior to that taught design 
studio and spatial theory at the School of 
Architecture of the Pontifi cia Universidad 
Católica del Ecuador in Quito. He holds a 
PhD from the Centre for Research 
Architecture, Goldsmiths, and is a long-term 
collaborator with the Forensic Architecture 
Project. 
 Tiziana Terranova  is Associate Professor of 
New Media and Cultural Studies in the 
Department of Human and Social Sciences, 
University of Naples ‘L’Orientale’. She has 
written extens ively about the cultural 
polit ics of digital media, network 
tech no lo gies and media culture in peer- 
reviewed journ als and edited collec tions. She 
is the author of  Corpi nella rete (2015), 
 Network Culture: Politics for the Information
CONTRIBUTORS 
xxxi
of Technology Sydney. His current interests 
include the renais sance of Australian 
Aboriginal pyro- tech no lo gies, the history of 
arti fi  cial biospheres and climate control, and 
the anti cip at ory polit ics of indus trial 
micro bi o logy. He is currently complet ing a 
manu script entitled  More Heat than Life: The 
Tangled Roots of Ecology and Economics . 
 Lindsay Grace Weber  is a gradu ate of Wesleyan 
University and Utrecht University’s Gender 
and Ethnicity  RMA , and is currently pursu ing 
a PhD in Comparative Studies in Discourse 
and Society at the University of Minnesota. 
She has worked with  CASCO ’s (Un)usual 
Business research collect ive and been active 
in autonom ous femin ist collect ives in 
Connecticut, Oakland ( CA ) and Utrecht. 
 Inigo Wilkins  is in the process of complet ing his 
doctoral thesis on the topic of ‘Irreversible 
Noise’ at the Centre for Cultural Studies at 
Goldsmiths. He is co- editor of the journal 
 Glass Bead . 
 James Williams is Honorary Professor of 
Philosophy, The Alfred Deakin Institute for 
Citizenship and Globalisation, Deakin 
University. His latest books include  A Process 
Philosophy of Signs (2016),  Gilles Deleuze’s 
Difference and Repetition: A Critical 
Introduction and Guide (2nd ed. 2013) and 
 Gilles Deleuze’s Philosophy of Time: A Critical 
Introduction and Guide (2011). He is 
currently prepar ing a process semi ology of 
the sublime and studies of concepts in 
recent philo sophy of mind and biology. 
 Shannon Winnubst  is the author of two books, 
 Way Too Cool: Selling Out Race and 
Ethics (2015) and  Queering Freedom 
(2006), the editor of  Reading Bataille Now 
(2007) and the co- editor, with Lynne Huffer, 
of  philoSOPHIA: A Journal of Continental 
Feminism . She is Professor of Women’s, 
Gender and Sexuality Studies at Ohio State 
University. 
 Cary Wolfe  is Bruce and Elizabeth Dunlevie 
Professor in the Department of English and 
Philosophy, Russian Academy of Sciences. 
She is a member of the Russian collect ive 
‘Chto Delat?’ (‘What is to be Done?’), and 
the author of  Introduction to the Erotic 
Philosophy of Georges Bataille (2009, in 
Russian) and  The History of Animals: An 
Essay on Negativity, Immanence and 
Freedom (2012). 
 Iris van der Tuin  is an Asso ci ate Professor of 
Liberal Arts and Sciences at Utrecht 
University, the Netherlands. Her work on the 
new mater i al isms has been published by, 
among others, Open Humanities Press, 
 Australian Feminist Studies and  Hypatia: A 
Journal of Feminist Philosophy . She chairs 
the  COST Action New Materialism: 
Networking European Scholarship on ‘How 
Matter Comes to Matter’ (2014–18). 
 Timotheus Vermeulen  is associate professor in 
Media. Culture and Society at the University 
of Oslo. He has written extensively about 
contemporary culture and aesthetics, in 
particular fi lm and TV. His latest book, 
 Metamodernism: Historicity, Affect and 
Depth after Postmodernism , co-edited with 
Robin van den Akker and Alison Gibbons, is 
due to be be published with Rowman and 
Littlefi eld in 2017. Vermeulen is currently 
working on a book project on the ‘as-if’ in 
contemporary art. 
 Rodante van der Waal  is fi nish ing her Research 
Master Philosophy at the University of 
Amsterdam in 2017 and studies midwifery 
at the Midwifery Academy of Amsterdam. In 
her studies, she focuses mostly on 
post mod ern French thought, posthu man ism, 
femin ism and issues concern ing repro duc-
tion. Within the broad fi eld of philosophy, the 
topics of preg nancy and giving birth remain 
as yet very unthought. In her papers and 
other writ ings she tries to think these themes 
from a theor et ical as well as a more 
intim ate, or poet ical, perspect ive. 
 Jeremy Walker  is Lecturer in the Social and 
Political Sciences program at the University
xxxii 
CONTRIBUTORS
considers himself a heretical Platonist, an 
unortho dox Kantian and a minim al ist 
Hegelian, but is equally happy being 
described as a ration al ist. His work focuses 
mainly on the inter sec tion between the 
meth od o logy of meta phys ics and the 
struc ture of ration al ity, but also includes 
philo sophy of value, ethics, aesthet ics and 
social theory.  
Founding Director of the 3 CT : Center for 
Critical and Cultural Theory at Rice University. 
He is also the found ing editor of the series 
 Posthumanities at the University of 
Minnesota Press. 
 Peter Wolfendale  is an inde pend ent philo sopher 
living and working in England. He is the 
author of  Object-Oriented Philosophy: The 
Noumenon’s New Clothes (2014). He
selec tion of key terms and authors – and a 
crit ical inter ven tion in the ﬁ eld. Th e crit-
ical part tends to emphas ize two main 
dimen sions: the ﬁ rst is the signi ﬁ c ance of 
the neo- mater i al ist approaches and of 
monistic process onto lo gies in contem por-
ary crit ical posthu man theory. Th e second 
is an ethical concern for the rela tion ship 
between new concepts and real- life condi-
tions, with strong emphasis being placed 
through out the volume on the need for 
creat ive responses to the current chal-
lenges. Th is ethical passion drives the 
volume and it also helps shape its aﬀ ect ive 
tone, in terms of account ab il ity, the respect 
for diversity and the convic tion that 
critique and creativ ity work in tandem. In 
this respect, the  Posthuman Glossary may 
be said to both fulﬁ l and defy the usual 
expect a tions and aims of a gloss ary. 
 ANTHROPOS REDUX  
 Th e start ing assump tion of this volume is 
that the histor ical situ ation of today – eco-
lo gic ally, econom ic ally, socio- polit ic ally 
as well as aﬀ ect ively and psych ic ally – is 
unpre ced en ted. We deﬁ ne our era as the 
Anthropocene, 1  by which we under stand 
the geolo gical time when humans are 
having a lasting and negat ive eﬀ ect upon 
the planet’s systems. As the ‘Generation 
Anthropocene’ 2 we believe that new 
notions and terms are needed to address 
the constitu en cies and conﬁ g ur a tions 
of the present and to map future direc-
tions. Th ere is the pres sure of old and new 
contem por ary concerns, such as the 
 Introduction 
 ROSI  BRAIDOTTI AND   MARIA  HLAVAJOVA  
   hat could terms such as ‘alter gorithm’, 
W‘rewild ing’, ‘negen tropy’ and ‘tech-
noan im al ism’ possibly have in common? 
Th e answer lies in the pages of this book: 
they are all neolo gisms that attempt to 
come to terms with the complex it ies of the 
posthu man predic a ment. Every time we 
refer to some of these neolo gisms in the 
intro duc tion, we will insert the inver ted 
commas, as a way of index ing them and 
alert ing the readers to the speciﬁ c incep-
tion of the terms. 
 Th is gloss ary rests on the working 
deﬁ n i tion of the posthu man as a ﬁ eld 
of enquiry and exper i ment a tion that is 
triggered by the conver gence of post-
human ism 
on 
the 
one 
hand 
and 
post- anthro po centrism on the other. 
Posthumanism focuses on the critique of 
the human ist ideal of ‘Man’ as the univer-
sal repres ent at ive of the human, while 
post- anthro po centrism criti cizes species 
hier archy and advances bio- centred egal it-
ari an ism. Equally inter dis cip lin ary in 
char ac ter, they refer back to diﬀ er ent tradi-
tions, cite diﬀ er ent authors and tend to 
take place in- between diﬀ er ent discip lin-
ary areas. Th e conver gence of these two 
strands is produ cing a dynamic new ﬁ eld 
of schol ar ship right now. Accordingly, in 
this  Posthuman Glossary  we take the term 
‘posthu man’ to mark the emer gence of a 
trans dis cip lin ary discourse that is more 
than the sum of posthu man ism and 
post- anthro po centrism, and points to a 
qual it at ive leap in a new – perhaps 
‘post- discip lin ary’ – crit ical direc tion. 
 Th is volume consequently is both an 
attempt to reﬂ ect the current state of 
posthu man schol ar ship – by provid ing a
the wider mater ial world, and with its 
histor ies and events. 3 In a broader sense, 
this gloss ary assumes that the human is 
always partially consti tuted by the non- 
human and that their inter ac tion is too 
complex to be reduced to a mere dialect-
ical oppos i tion. All the more so, as 
nowadays the non- human also involves 
tech no lo gic ally manu fac tured ‘others’ – 
both modern ist appli ances and objects and 
post- indus trial ‘smart’ things. Th e latter 
play a crucial role in deﬁ n ing the posthu-
man moment by stress ing the primacy of 
digital medi ation and elec tronic circuits in 
our self- deﬁ n i tions and inter ac tion. One of 
the chal lenges for the  Posthuman Glossary 
consequently is to devise adequate theor et-
ical and artistic repres ent a tions for the 
new forms of inter con nec tion between 
humans and non- human factors and 
agents. 
 Th e bound ar ies between the ‘inhuman’ 
and the ‘non- human’, however, are porous 
and dynamic. Many schol ars use them 
inter change ably to refer to other- than-
human or less/more- than-human life, 
enlist ing selec ted aspects of geology, 
anthro po logy, 
theo logy, 
zoology 
and 
biology to the task of reach ing an adequate 
under stand ing of these terms. In this 
gloss ary, we try to make crit ical distinc-
tions and by ‘inhuman’ we refer to a double 
phenomenon, which raises both analyt ical 
and norm at ive ques tions. Analytically, the 
term refers to the de- human iz ing eﬀ ects of 
struc tural injustice and exclu sions upon 
entire sections of the human popu la tion 
who have not enjoyed the priv ileges of 
being considered fully human. Gender and 
sexual diﬀ er ence, race and ethni city, class 
and educa tion, health and able- bodied ness 
are crucial markers and gate keep ers of 
accept able ‘human ity’. Th ey are terms that 
index access to the rights, prerog at ives and 
enti tle ments of being human. Th ose who 
are excluded from a domin ant notion of 
changes induced by advanced tech no lo-
gical devel op ments on the one hand and 
the struc tural inequal it ies of the neolib eral 
econom ics of global capit al ism on the 
other. Accordingly, the contrib ut ors to the 
 Posthuman Glossary  analyse both mater ial 
and discurs ive condi tions: soci olo gical 
reality and the more epistemic dimen sions 
are taken together, as two sides of the 
same coin. Th is assumes, as a start ing 
point, a nature–culture continuum that 
deﬁ es binary think ing. In other words, the 
‘compu ta tional turn’ is very ‘earth- bound’ 
and the global economy, however ‘plan et-
ary’, is also emin ently ‘terrestrial’. It is just 
the case that today, the former ‘four 
elements’ (earth, air, water and ﬁ re) have 
mutated into ‘geo- hydro-solar- bio-techno- 
polit ics’. If this sounds puzz ling, it’s because 
it genu inely is so. We need to take on the 
task of think ing diﬀ er ently about our 
current predic a ment. 
 As a consequence of these muta tions, 
two notions that pertain to resid ual 
human ism – the  non -human and the 
 in human – are very import ant for the 
 Posthuman Glossary , because they single 
out acute aspects of our social reality . Th e 
non- human refers to the status of depre ci-
ated natur al ized ‘others’ whose exist ence 
has been cast outside the realm of anthro-
po centric thought and conﬁ ned within 
non- human life ( zoe ). Th ey are, histor ic-
ally, the members of ethni cit ies other than 
the ruling and colo nial European powers. 
But they also refer to veget able, animal and 
earth species and, by now, the genes and 
genomic codes that consti tute the basic 
archi tec ture of Life, or rather its ‘epigen etic 
land scapes’. Th e refer ence to epigen et ics 
(see the entry on Epigenetic Landscape) is 
import ant to this gloss ary, in that it 
contrib utes to a critique of anthro po-
centric genetic determ in ism by stress ing 
that, even at the level of the gene, the 
human is already inter con nec ted with
INTRODUCTION 
of a double medi ation: ubiquit ous digital 
networks and bio- genetic regen er a tion 
processes on the one hand and envir on-
mental destruc tion on a mass scale on the 
other. Th e termin o lo gical diversity is very 
creat ive: some authors emphas ize new 
‘general ecolo gies’ and ‘resi li ence’, while 
others focus on human and non- human 
species ‘extinc tion’. Global migra tion ﬂ ows 
– also known as the ‘Lampedusa’ eﬀ ect – 
are read in the frame of endur ing patterns 
of economic, sexu al ized and racial ized 
oppres sion. Data ﬂ ows in virtual space 
coexist with regimes of earth- bound, 
spatial manage ment based on growing 
incar cer a tion and ‘execu tion’. Th e perpetual 
‘war’ on terror occurs along side the spread-
ing of extens ive ‘secur ity/surveil lance’ 
systems, to name but a few signi ﬁ c ant 
markers of our time. 
 Th e eﬀ ect of the intern ally contra dict-
ory devel op ments of the posthu man era is 
that they contrib ute to explode the concept 
of the human. Th e human is no longer the 
famil iar notion that was previ ously known 
and taken for granted, and it is not consen-
su ally shared ( Braidotti, 2013 ). Th e drastic 
trans form a tions of our bio and necro- 
polit ical regimes have come to mark a 
‘posthu man condi tion’ that combines 
excit ing new devel op ments with a trouble-
some reit er a tion of old, unre solved prob-
lems. Th e  Posthuman Glossary  assesses this 
moment as marking the end of the self- 
refer en tial arrog ance of a domin ant 
Eurocentric notion of the human and the 
opening up of new perspect ives. 
 If art, science, and the academic 
Humanities have shared one thing, it is 
their common engage ment with construc-
tions and repres ent a tions of the  human 
within their respect ive realms. Artists and 
Humanities schol ars also mirror each 
other in their mutual explor a tions of how 
people process, docu ment and analyse 
their human exper i ences. Reference and 
the human based on masculin ist, classist, 
racist and Eurocentric para met ers see their 
lives down graded from the human as 
pertain ing to ‘ bios ’, to a besti al ized exist-
ence closer to ‘ zoe ’. Th is insight about 
struc tural exclu sions ﬂ ies in the face of the 
univer sal ist preten sions of the human ist 
tradi tion. Th is crit ical posi tion also lies 
at the core of bio- polit ical analyses of 
contem por ary power rela tions and feeds 
into a critique of the limit a tions of human-
ist thought and prac tices. 
 Normatively, however, the inhuman 
also denounces the inhu mane, unjust prac-
tices of our times. More speciﬁ c ally it 
stresses the violent and even murder ous 
struc ture of contem por ary geo- polit ical 
and social rela tions, also known as ‘necro- 
polit ics’. Th ese include increas ing economic 
polar isa tion and the ‘expul sion’ of people 
from homes and home lands in an upsurge 
of global ‘neo- colo nial’ power rela tions. 
Holding these diﬀ er ent dimen sions of the 
‘inhuman’ and their social eﬀ ects in some 
sort of crit ical balance is one of the chal-
lenges of the  Posthuman Glossary. 
 Many of the contrib ut ors address the 
bio- and necro- polit ics of the day, notably 
the strident correl a tion between the 
redeﬁ n i tion of the humans’ inter ac tion 
with their ecolo gical and tech no lo gical 
envir on ments on the one hand and the 
brutal ity of the power rela tions of today, 
on the other. In this gloss ary, ‘metadata 
society’ thrives along side heaps of ‘digital 
rubbish’ and the phenomenon known as 
‘neur onal aesthet ics’ works in tandem with 
‘exclu sion zone’, appar ently unper turbed 
by their internal contra dic tions. In other 
words, the new concep tual and termin o lo-
gical innov a tions intro duced by the 
contrib ut ors are posit ive inter rog a tions 
of ongoing new devel op ments, but they 
do not recoil from assess ing also their 
negat ive reper cus sions. Th e entries of this 
gloss ary cover for instance the coex ist ence
‘Generation Anthropocene’? Th e urgency 
of these ques tions is equal to the vital ity 
of the ﬁ eld: even as a relat ive neolo gism, 
the Anthropocene has already become 
another 
‘Anthropomeme’ 
( Macfarlane 
2016 ). It has spawned several altern at ive 
terms, such as ‘Capitalocene’ ( Haraway 
2015a ,  2015b ), ‘Anthrop- obscene’ ( Parikka 
2014 ), but also ‘Plantationcene’ ( Tsing 
2015 ), ‘Manthropocene’ and ‘Plasticene’. 
Th is prolif er a tion does not contrib ute to 
linear stabil ity, but it rather fosters intel lec-
tual and artistic creativ ity. 
 Taking the carto graphic aim of the 
 Posthuman Glossary  seri ously by survey-
ing the current state of the schol ar ship, we 
are also commit ted to point ing out missing 
links and exclu sions. In this spirit, the 
gloss ary attempts to chal lenge the contem-
por ary mani fest a tions of power in ways 
that priv ilege Eurocentric tradi tions of 
crit ical thought and do not engage the 
work of ‘deco lo nial critique’, ‘neo- colo nial’ 
polit ics and black studies in a sustained 
manner. We are strongly opposed to mono-
cul tures, also and espe cially of the post-
human mind ( Shiva 1993 ). Although the 
gloss ary oﬀ ers a few entries in the post-
colo nial and race ﬁ elds of posthu man 
study, we are aware of our crit ical ellipses 
and see them as a limit a tion of this collec-
tion – liter ally, a matter of ﬁ nitude. Like 
all carto graph ies, the  Posthuman Glossary 
only oﬀ ers a partial account and a synop-
tical view of the ﬁ eld at this point in time. 4 
 Th e  Posthuman Glossary  also attempts 
to build bridges across a number of other 
missing links. It aims ﬁ rst of all to connect 
schol ar ship and crit ical thought to the 
real- life issues and praxes that are of 
imme di ate relev ance to indi vidu als and 
society today. Although there is much talk 
nowadays of the ‘impact’ of academic work 
upon the real world, the gulf between the 
two remains large. Th is volume starts by 
ﬁ lling in this gap. Secondly, the gloss ary 
appeals to that partic u lar idea of the 
human, however, pertain to a block of 
‘common sense’ notions that are constantly 
deployed without ever being seri ously 
deﬁ ned. Too oft en still, the term ‘human’ is 
simply accep ted and circu lated without 
crit ical analyses of its internal frac tures 
and constitutive hier arch ies. Th e ‘human’ 
as concept attains an impli citly norm at ive 
status as what humans ought to be, or not, 
as well as what they may actu ally happen 
to be. In academic research in the 
Humanities, the hege mony of human ist 
values in deﬁ n ing the human is such that 
one disputes the notion of the human and 
the worth of human ism at one’s own risk 
and peril. As stated earlier, the  Posthuman 
Glossary  pursues a double aim: it presents a 
variety of altern at ive responses to the 
critique of human ism and anthro po-
centrism, while also attempt ing to sketch a 
theor et ic ally coher ent crit ical posi tion on 
the posthu man. Both approaches are 
sustained by the convic tion that neither 
the limit a tions set by the anthro po morphic 
nature of humans nor the excesses of their 
anthro po centric ambi tions have been the 
target of sustained analysis and criti cism. 
 As a result of this range of perspect ives, 
the posthu man – far from having a stable 
and coher ent iden tity – mani fests itself by 
a vast number of dispar ate concerns that 
do not always coalesce into a single them-
atic ﬁ eld. A major axis of reﬂ ec tion running 
across the  Posthuman Glossary there fore 
consists in a crit ical over view and assess-
ment of the multiple discourses that are 
currently circu lat ing about the notion of 
the Anthropocene itself. How useful is the 
notion of the Anthropocene? Th is book 
raises sustained crit ical ques tions as to 
whether the aware ness of a collect ive sense 
of ecolo gical, social and aﬀ ect ive respons-
ib il ity neces sar ily enhances ethical agency 
and polit ical conscious ness. Besides, how 
inclus ive and how repres ent at ive is the
INTRODUCTION 
produc tion, so as to bring together diﬀ er-
ent communit ies of thinkers and prac ti-
tion ers who may not other wise come 
across each other. As we mentioned before, 
this is espe cially the case for perspect ives 
developed from deco lo nial, black and race 
studies that are oft en margin al ized in both 
new media and posthu man schol ar ship. 
And it is also the case for the artistic and 
curat orial community, who can oft en 
appear to be phys ic ally held apart from the 
academic world, and vice versa. We also 
hope to trigger some trans dis cip lin ary 
energy and inspir a tion from these unex-
pec ted encoun ters, so as to renew the 
scope of crit ical inquiry and move towards 
a more inclus ive posthu man crit ical theory. 
Th e pace is so fast that the speed is breath-
tak ing. In response, the  Posthuman 
Glossary is a valiant attempt to escape that 
velo city and to reach out for some tempor-
ary ‘meta- stabil ity’, by combin ing a carto-
graphic approach with a crit ical response. 
 THE INTERDISCIPLINARY HUBS  
 It follows from the above that the notion 
of the posthu man is in full expan sion, 
in terms both of the sheer amount of 
schol ar ship being produced and the new 
qual it at ive perspect ives it intro duces. Th e 
termin o lo gical diversity is admir able and 
it goes hand in hand with a variety of 
genres and theor et ical styles. At this stage it 
includes, for instance, a posthu man mani-
festo ( Pepperell 2003 ); a school of inhuman 
thought ( Lyotard 1991 ;  Grimaldi 2011 ); 
emphasis on non- human agency (Raﬀ nsøe 
2013); 
on 
posthu man 
person hood 
( Wennemann 2013 ); on the ‘new’ human 
( Rosendahl 
Th omsen 
2013 ); 
the 
‘a-
 human’ ( MacCormack 2014 ); the ‘dishuman’ 
( Goodley, Lawthom and Runswick-Cole 
aims at connect ing artistic and curat orial 
prac tice to scientiﬁ c research, tech no lo-
gical innov a tions and schol arly work. 
Th is implies an open- minded atti tude on 
both sides and the convic tion that there is 
much to be gained through these dialogues. 
Th e assump tion that we need to exper i-
ment with diﬀ er ent ways of think ing places 
the contem por ary artists in a crucial posi-
tion for schol ars strug gling with the proto-
cols of estab lished academic work and 
language, and vice versa. 
 Th irdly, it is the aim of the gloss ary to 
connect diﬀ er ent gener a tions of thinkers 
and users of human and non- human tech-
no lo gies. Th is is espe cially relev ant now 
that elec tronic networks enter into their 
nth oper a tional gener a tion, result ing in 
new gener a tions of human on- line users 
being deﬁ ned as ‘digital natives’. It is urgent 
to study and work across their respect ive 
assess ments of our present predic a ment 
and to explore the implic a tions of the fact 
that age- indexed diﬀ er ences nowadays are 
struc tured by size able infra struc tural 
diver gences, such as access to bio- medical 
tech no lo gies that extend and segment life 
on the one hand and the accu mu la tion of 
debt on the other. Such struc tural inequal-
it ies add addi tional layers of complex ity to 
the ques tion of intergen er a tional rela tions. 
Here the posthu man approach oﬀ ers a 
fresh lens with which to frame intergen er-
a tional justice in the Anthropocene and 
across the great digital divide. Th e need 
arises to analyse also the implic a tions of 
millen nial youth culture’s high levels of 
tech no lo gical liter acy for their rela tion ship 
to the know ledge and exper i ence of older 
gener a tions of crit ical thinkers and, for 
instance, the formu la tion of ‘socially just 
pedago gies’. 
 Th e breadth of terms, scope and 
purpose of the  Posthuman Glossary  is not 
only quant it at ive, but also qual it at ive: we 
want to de- segreg ate the diﬀ er ent and
the ﬁ eld. In cases where we were not able to 
secure an original contri bu tion from these 
schol ars them selves, we have draft ed 
speciﬁ c entries cover ing their work. Next 
to this, there are more crit ical, creat ive and 
even exper i mental entries that aim at 
devis ing new schemes of thought to deal 
with the contem por ary chal lenges. Many 
of them aim at fulﬁ lling the ethical task of 
explor ing the rela tion ship between new 
concepts and real- life condi tions. Th e 
cumu lat ive bibli o graphy included at the 
end of the volume attempts to reﬂ ect as 
fully as possible both these aspects of the 
gloss ary. 
 As a matter of profes sional ethics, the 
gloss ary is respect ful and open to multiple 
and poten tially contra dict ory inter pret a-
tions of the posthu man predic a ment, both 
on concep tual and on polit ical grounds. 
Th is means also that a broad spec trum of 
academic discip lines is repres en ted in this 
volume. Multiple new discourses, which 
call them selves ‘studies’ (gender studies, 
post co lo nial studies, media studies etc. 
etc.) however, have grown in- between the 
discip lines and func tion as incub at ors for 
new ideas, methods, images and repres ent-
a tions ( Braidotti 2016b ). Th e cross- overs 
between them are currently produ cing 
excit ing new perspect ives in posthu man 
schol ar ship. 
 Some meta- patterns are emer ging 
across the diﬀ er ent entries in this volume. 
We have detec ted a number of crucial 
inter dis cip lin ary hubs that play the role of 
creat ive nuclei and we have consequently 
taken them as points of refer ence for this 
gloss ary. Th ey are not discrete and neatly 
deﬁ ned areas, but rather like rhizomic 
lines that zigzag through many contri bu-
tions, allow ing the authors to belong to 
several of them at the same time. Examples 
of these inter dis cip lin ary hubs are, to begin 
with: compar at ive liter at ure and cultural 
2014 ) and posthu man nomadic subjects 
( Braidotti 2013 ). Next to these relat ively 
famil iar terms there is a fast- growing world 
of neolo gisms and creat ive inter ven tions. 
 With 141 contrib ut ors and over 160 
entries, our volume bears witness to the 
explo sion of this new ﬁ eld of research and 
proposes its own discurs ive strategy for 
dealing with the theor et ical and termin o-
lo gical exuber ance. As stated from the 
outset, one of the aims of the  Posthuman 
Glossary is to provide an over view of the 
diﬀ er ent crit ical terms, the many ‘turns’ 
and the leading concepts of posthu man 
crit ical thought and schol ar ship in the 
Humanities today, in dialogue with 
contem por ary artistic and activ ist prac-
tices. Th e range of theor et ical
INTRODUCTION 
 Livingston and Puar 2011 ;  Colebrook 
2014 ) and the emphasis on ‘posthu man 
sexu al ity’ (McCormack 2012). Th e turn 
to new mater i al ism ( Dolphijn and van der 
Tuin 2012 ;  Coole and Frost 2010 ;  Neimanis 
2014 ;  Laboria Cuboniks 2015 ) and the 
aﬀ ect ive turn ( Clough 2008 ) are also sig-
niﬁ c ant. Emphasis on bodily mater i al ism 
( Braidotti 1991 ,  1994 ) and carnal thought 
( Sobchack 2004 ) mutates into ‘vibrant 
matter’ ( Bennett 2010 ); and invent ive life 
( Fraser, Kember and Lury 2006 ); ‘trans- 
corpor eal ity’ ( Alaimo 2010 ) and ‘post-
human perform ativ ity’ ( Barad 2007 ). Of 
course the list is not exhaust ive and it 
demon strates the stag ger ing vital ity of the 
new thinkers – such as those who draft ed 
the ‘xenofem in ism’ mani festo – who are 
inspired as much by ‘Lady Gaga’ as by the 
femin ist clas sics. 
 A brief over view of these inter dis cip-
lin ary hubs also fulﬁ ls another purpose. 
Our hope is that it may serve as a navig a-
tional tool to help non- special ists steer a 
course from relat ively famil iar inter dis cip-
lin ary discourses, into the wilder and more 
trans dis cip lin ary ﬁ eld of posthu man 
studies. Th e bibli o graph ical refer ences to 
these inter dis cip lin ary hubs, in other 
words, trace as many road- maps leading 
outwards, from within the academic 
discip lines and the crit ical ‘studies’ areas. 
 MULTIPLE AXES  
 Th e embar rass ment of inter dis cip lin ary 
riches oﬀ ered by the fast- growing ﬁ eld 
of posthu man schol ar ship is mani fold 
and 
multi- layered. 
Th erefore 
the 
 Posthuman Glossary strives to strike a 
balance between provid ing a survey and 
deﬁ n ing some meta- patterns, or emer ging 
theor et ical lines among the diﬀ er ent 
contri bu tions. 
studies, which have played a pion eer ing 
role in posthu man schol ar ship ( Wolfe 
2003 ,  2010 ;  Herbrechter 2011 ;  Nayar 2013 ) 
and have innov ated on methods as well as 
themes, espe cially eco- criti cism, animal 
studies and ‘ecoma ter i al ism’ ( Iovino and 
Opperman 2014a ;  Alaimo 2010 ). Another 
pion eer ing ﬁ eld is new media studies, 
which has taken a more mater ial turn in 
order to account for the polit ical economy 
of human/non- human inter ac tion and 
‘networked aﬀ ect’ in our times (Parikka, 
Paasonen, Fuller, Gabrys, Terranova in this 
volume). Environmental studies is another 
crucial innov ator in posthu man think ing, 
both the ﬁ rst Gaia gener a tion ( Lovelock 
2009 ) and more recent work on the post- 
anthro po centric as a meta morphic entity 
( Clarke 2008 ); multi- species analysis (van 
 Dooren 2014 ) and zoon to lo gies ( De 
Fontaney 1998 ;  Gray 2001 ,  Wolfe 2003 ). 
 Science and tech no logy studies can be 
taken as a nursery of posthu man insights, 
as test i ﬁ ed by the seminal work of Donna 
Haraway ( 1985 ,  1989 ,  1997 ,  2008 ), Isabelle 
Stengers ( 1987 ) and femin ist cultural 
studies of science ( Franklin, Lury and 
Stacey 2000 ). Recent schol ar ship returns to 
Darwin ( Creed 2009 ;  Midgley 2010 ;  Grosz 
2011 ), an author who had received little 
crit ical atten tion in the Humanities, with 
the excep tion of the pion eer ing eﬀ orts of 
Gillian Beer ( 1983 ), Stephen Jay Gould 
( 1997 ) and Hilary Rose (2000). 
 Feminist, gender and  LBGT + theory, as 
well as post co lo nial studies, are another 
inter sec tional crit ical hub. Feminists have 
long been theor iz ing the non- human and 
more espe cially the continuum between 
the human and the non- human ( Balsamo 
1996 ; 
 Braidotti 
2002 ; 
 Grosz 
2011 ; 
 Halberstam 
and 
Livingston 
1995 ; 
 Halberstam 2012 ). Th at trend is now accel-
er at ing in queer posthu man and inhuman 
theor ies ( Giﬀ ney and Hird 2008 ;  Hird and 
Roberts 2011 ;  Gruen and Weil 2012 ;
In the context of the Anthropocene, 
that is to say amidst increas ing global 
envir on mental degrad a tion, the century- 
old divide between nature and culture 
has to be ques tioned and displaced. A 
combin a tion of factors encour ages this 
crit ical move. Such factors occur in a wide 
range of ﬁ elds, like ‘arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence’; 
advances in the Life sciences, notably 
bio- genet ics; the intro duc tion of large- 
scale tech no lo gical medi ation through 
consumer elec tron ics; and the rise of 
neural 
sciences 
and 
compu ta tional 
cultures. In crit ical theory as in artistic 
prac tice the notion of a nature–culture 
continuum has become quite accep ted, 
though its implic a tions are seldom borne 
out. Contemporary posthu man schol ar-
ship pushes the nature–cultural continuum 
further, intro du cing terms such as ‘medi-
anatures’, ‘ecoma ter i al ism’ and ‘make-
human’ to replace the old divides. 
 Th e meth od o lo gical chal lenge for 
the  Posthuman Glossary consequently 
becomes how to repres ent theor et ic ally 
and artist ic ally the profound inter con nec-
tions between humans and non- human 
factors and agents. And how to fulﬁ l 
this task, moreover, while keeping in 
mind the struc tural inequal it ies that 
control access to the domin ant category 
of the ‘human’ to begin with. In accept ing 
the shift  towards monistic, neo- mater i al ist, 
holistic or ‘process onto lo gies’, we also 
need to redeﬁ ne the very terms of the 
nature–culture and human/non- human 
inter re la tions. Many authors in this 
volume address the ques tion of how 
models of thought and prac tice in contem-
por ary schol ar ship and the arts have 
been redeﬁ ned by new forms of inter con-
nec tion and inter ac tion between humans 
and non- humans. Others wonder to 
what an extent process- oriented, ‘object- 
oriented’, neo- spinozist, vital monistic 
philo sophies can sustain a shift  towards 
 As stated above, the ﬁ rst theor et ical 
orient a tions we fore ground rotate around 
neo- mater i al ism, ‘ecosophy’ and monistic 
vital philo sophies, in the wake of Deleuze 
and Guattari’s agenda- setting philo sophy. 
Some contri bu tions argue expli citly that 
monism is the philo soph ical ground ing for 
‘posthu man crit ical theory’ (Braidotti, 
Dolphijn, 
MacCormack 
and 
others), 
because it allows for rethink ing matter as 
self- organ iz ing 
process 
onto logy. 
A 
monistic onto logy, as both mater ial and 
vital, oﬀ ers possib il it ies of ground ing the 
embod ied and embed ded posthu man 
subject in process (Braidotti 2006b). 
Moreover, by focus ing on the dynamic 
inter ac tion of Sameness and Diﬀ erence, 
monism moves outside the scheme of 
dialect ical oppos i tion, stress ing instead the 
gener at ive force of living matter itself 
( Ansell Pearson 1997 ,  1999 ). Freed from 
the distinc tion between natural and 
construc ted events, a monistic philo sophy 
of 
intel li gent, 
self- organ iz ing 
matter 
produces a mater i al ist polit ical physics and 
‘polit ical aﬀ ect’ ( Bonta and Protevi 2004 ; 
 Protevi 2001 ,  2009 ,  2013 ). 
 Th e inﬂ u ence of Deleuze and Guattari’s 
ideas, which is felt strongly in this volume, 
is, however, not exclus ive. Several contrib-
ut ors follow diﬀ er ent ways of ‘matter ing’, 
that is to say of explor ing matter as a 
dynamic process. Many other process- 
oriented onto lo gies are at work, for 
instance in the refer ences to Derrida, 
Whitehead, 
Wittgenstein, 
Meillassoux, 
Latour, Haraway and others. A major point 
of theor et ical conver gence between them 
is the need to over come binar ies and to 
state that matter, the world and humans 
them selves are not dual istic entit ies struc-
tured accord ing to dialect ical prin ciples of 
internal or external oppos i tion, but rather 
mater i ally embed ded subjects- in-process 
circu lat ing within webs of rela tion with 
forces, entit ies and encoun ters.
INTRODUCTION 
networks – and for war weaponry – as in 
the case of semi- auto mated drones – the 
issue of their relat ive inde pend ence of 
direct human control raises some ethical 
and polit ical concerns. In this regard, the 
 Posthuman Glossary oﬀ ers a number of 
models 
of 
resist ance 
selec ted 
from 
contem por ary crit ical thought, arts and 
media activ ism, such as ideas of ‘state less 
state’ and ‘posthu man rights’, as well as 
‘postan im al ism’ and ‘robo philo sophy’. Th e 
issue of how to bury the digital dead also 
receives a great deal of atten tion. It 
concerns defunct people’s email addresses 
and social network links and pages, but 
also dead codes, obsol ete tech no lo gies and 
programmes and other forms of ‘static 
glow’. Electronic  Pietas is here to stay. 
 Th ese ques tions ﬂ ow inev it ably towards 
the issue of bio- polit ical manage ment of 
life – see for instance the growing import-
ance of ‘food studies’ and ‘wear able tech no-
lo gies’. More speciﬁ c ally they explore 
contem por ary 
necro- polit ical 
govern-
ment al ity, that is to say the manage ment of 
death and dying, which oft en relies on 
algorithmic cultures and digital secur ity. 
Technologies have always been linked to 
the milit ary and to popu la tion control, but 
such a link has under gone signi ﬁ c ant 
muta tions today. Many of the entries in 
this gloss ary consequently address the 
impact of contem por ary digital tech no lo-
gies upon the mech an isms and the tech-
niques of surveil lance and monit or ing of 
the social space, of border areas and war 
zones. Other authors address ques tions 
about the kinds of changes that have come 
upon visual tech no lo gies in the process 
of being turned into track ing devices. 
Th e ques tion of deﬁ n ing the appro pri ate 
objects of study in rela tion to a culture of 
secur ity, surveil lance, counter- terror ism 
and the milit ar iz a tion of the social space 
raises the related issue of the respons ib il ity 
of the crit ical thinkers who are dealing 
posthu man ethical rela tions and post-
human polit ics. 
 Th e 
human/non- human; 
nature–
culture; medi anatures continuum includes 
the impact of networked cultures. Digital 
medi ation has intro duced a new public 
sphere, through the speciﬁ city of its 
‘algorithmic studies’ and culture. Th erefore 
a new set of ques tions arises, which again 
covers both the mater ial and the imma-
terial aspect of medi ation. For instance, 
many contrib ut ors explore the correl a tion 
between embed ded discourses and prac-
tices around ‘digital citizen ship’ and 
many forms of ‘undoc u mented citizen ship’. 
Digital activ ism, in groups such as 
‘Anonymous’, stands along side the ‘Occupy’ 
move ment, in a public sphere that is thickly 
mater ial, yet completely medi ated. 
 At the centre of the public debate about 
the digital public sphere is the ques tion of 
what may be the social, legal, ethical and 
polit ical relev ance for the ‘bodies politic’ 
of the ‘hyper so cial’ subjects in the ‘post- 
inter net’ era. A key issue, for instance, is 
how to assess the diﬀ er ent digital agendas 
that are being set up by govern ments, 
corpor a tions, the milit ary, the global media 
and users them selves. Th e over- emphasis 
on corpor ate prior it ies such as trans par-
ency and digital rights in public debates 
may work to the detri ment of more 
funda mental analyses of how posthu man 
subjectiv ity is being re- struc tured by the 
current tech no lo gical medi ation. In this 
regard, the  Posthuman Glossary takes a 
crit ical distance from ‘transhuman ism’ and 
its human enhance ment project, which 
serves the corpor ate interests of the robot-
ics sector and of the more determ in istic 
strands of contem por ary brain research 
(see Ferrando in this volume). 
 Furthermore, as advanced compu ta-
tional networks have come to provide 
the basic logist ical infra struc ture for the 
global economy – as in the stock exchange
real- life condi tions in fast- chan ging times. 
We might go so far as to suggest that 
uncrit ical reli ance on termin o lo gical 
conven tions today betrays a form of intel-
lec tual lazi ness that is ethic ally incon sist-
ent, consid er ing the urgency of some of 
the issues we are facing. In this gloss ary, 
ethical account ab il ity works in tandem 
with the produc tion of adequate intel lec-
tual carto graph ies. Accordingly we have 
encour aged the contrib ut ors to exper i-
ment with what we can only describe as a 
groun ded, prag matic and account able 
approach to theor et ical creativ ity. We want 
to examine the many ways in which the 
collect ive imagin a tion is able to draw 
termin o lo gical inspir a tion from a variety 
of theor et ical and real- life
INTRODUCTION 
natural and construc ted resources ( Shiva 
1997 ;  Chakrabarty 2009 ; Braidotti 2013, 
 Haraway 1985 ,  2015a ). 
 Th us, the gloss ary focuses on how 
contem por ary schol ar ship and the arts 
respond to the posthu man predic a ment – 
not only in the propos i tional content of 
their argu ments, but also through the 
hybrid and complex methods by which 
they bring these ques tions to bear. Th e 
assump tion that the Anthropocenic social 
imagin ary is created by images and meta-
phors, repres ent a tions and anti cip a tions 
that emerge from the arts, liter at ure, 
cinema and new media entails crucial 
implic a tions in terms of their social 
respons ib il ity. Th is book raises serious 
ques tions about the ways in which 
academic schol ar ship in the Humanities 
is react ing to this situ ation and how it 
assesses the role culture plays in shaping 
the contem por ary social imagin ary. Some 
contrib ut ors ques tion which images can be 
taken as emblem atic of the posthu man 
condi tion: is the icon the spec tac u lar, shiny 
body of cyber netic mech an ism? Or should 
we rather value to the more humble icon 
that is the anti- concep tion ‘Pill’? 
 Wary of the fact that the ‘human’ has 
never been a neutral term, but rather a 
notion that indexes access to enti tle ments 
and power, and ever mindful that ‘we’ 
are not human to the same degree, 
extent and scale, ‘we’ have a problem of 
both self- repres ent a tion and recog ni tion 
of deval or ized ‘others’. Th is crit ical insight 
is polit ic ally signi ﬁ c ant consid er ing that in 
the public debate at present there is a great 
deal of stated cognit ive and moral anxiety 
about the state of the health of the human 
( Armstrong and Montag 2009 ); the status 
of Anthropos today ( Rabinow 2003 ;  Rose 
2007 ;  Esposito 2008a ); the crisis of the 
human ist vision of the human ( Habermas 
2003 ;  Sloterdijk 2009a ;  Pope Francis 2015 ); 
fear of the posthu man future ( Fukuyama 
by 
artistic 
and 
curat orial 
prac tice. 
Considering the import ance of exper i-
ment ing with new ways of think ing that 
exceed the determ in a tion of exist ing 
categor ies, through out the gloss ary the 
readers will ﬁ nd several visual essays that 
explore the concepts pertain ing to post-
human predic a ment (from ‘geomytho lo-
gies’ to ‘anthro po cene obser vat ory’, ‘forests 
as polis and polit ics’ to ‘hyper sea’) through 
the language of visual arts. Several contrib-
ut ors raise the follow ing ques tions: which 
are the assumed subjects and presumed 
object matters of the arts and how do they 
inter sect – or fail to – with academic schol-
ar ship? What can artistic prac tice and 
schol arly research do to strengthen and 
inspire each other on the issue of the in/
non/post/-human? What meth od o lo gical 
and polit ical alli ances do we need to 
sustain in order to co- create robust con-
cep tual and exper i mental termin o lo gies 
that may be adequate to the complex ity 
of our times? Th is gloss ary provides a 
broad spec trum of answers to these crucial 
ques tions. 
 MULTIPLE HUMANITIES  
 Th e ambi tious goal of ﬁ lling in missing 
links and bring ing together several 
communit ies takes us back to some funda-
mental self- ques tion ing, namely: who are 
‘we’, exactly? In some ways the contin ued 
emphasis on a general idea of the posthu-
man and the Anthropocene – all vari ations 
and puns notwith stand ing – becomes yet 
another way of perpetu at ing a narciss istic 
form of anthro po centrism. Th is gener al-
ized notion entails a further risk that, by 
creat ing a new sense and image of pan- 
human inter con nec tion, it may actu ally 
erase categor ical diﬀ er ences, struc tural 
injustices and dispar it ies in access to
adequate repres ent a tions of their contra-
dic tions. 
 Crucial to this project is there fore the 
ques tion: how do power diﬀ er ences based 
on race, class, gender, sexu al ity, ethni city, 
reli gion, age and able- bodied ness feature 
in the posthu man universe? How can we 
both analyse and resist the viol ence of the 
times? Where do art and schol ar ship sit 
within this resist ance, and what role can 
they play here? What epistemic and meth-
od o lo gical trans form a tions do prac tices 
need to undergo in order that they should 
not repro duce the inhuman struc tures of 
our times? Th e entries in the volume show 
that we need to acknow ledge that there 
may well be multiple and poten tially 
contra dict ory projects at stake in the 
complex re- compos i tions of the human, 
inhuman, non- human and posthu man at 
work right now.  
 MULTIPLE AFFECTS  
 Th e multi- layered and pluri- direc tional 
lines 
of 
thought 
pursued 
by 
the 
‘Anthropocene Generation’ contrib ute also 
to install an intense aﬀ ect ive economy, 
expressed in concepts or images. What is 
the sensory and percept ive appar atus of 
posthu man subjects like? A survey of the 
liter at ure 
reveals 
some 
funda mental 
alter a tions of our ‘ether eal scent’, ‘sensing 
prac tices’ and aﬀ ect ive responses. We 
altern ate between euphoria and despair, in 
a manic- depress ive cycle of frenzy and 
fear, narciss ism and para noia. Schizoid 
loops and systemic double- binds mark, 
together with xeno phobic para noia, the 
polit ical economy of aﬀ ects in advanced 
capit al ism. Th ey enact the double imper-
ative of global consumer ism and the 
inher ent defer ral of commod i ﬁ ed pleas ure, 
2002 ) and of possible extinc tion ( Klein 
2014 ). Th e eﬀ ect of these, oft en react ive, 
posi tions is that they result in hasty re- 
compos i tions of a new pan- human ity 
bonded in fear and anxiety about its own 
survival. Following this posi tion, a new 
‘human ity’ thus arises from the ashes of its 
Anthropocenic self- destruc tion. In this 
gloss ary, we want to resist such gener al iz a-
tions, while taking our respons ib il ity for 
the multi tude of prob lems in which we 
ﬁ nd ourselves – together. While ‘we’ are not 
the same, we are in  this together. 
 Accordingly, the  Posthuman Glossary 
gathers contrib ut ors who propose a 
wide range of altern at ive visions emer ging 
from the implo sion of the category of 
the ‘human’ and the explo sion of 
multiple forms of inhuman, non- human 
and posthu man subject posi tions. Such 
diversiﬁ c a tion is both quant it at ive and 
qual itative: 
it 
expresses 
geo- polit ical 
and socio- economic diﬀ er ences while 
sustain ing 
common 
concerns 
in 
a 
post- anthro po centric 
world 
order. 
Analyses of bio- and necro- power run 
through out this gloss ary. Th ey take the 
form of neo- mater i al ist, groun ded or 
imman ent inter con nec tions that are both 
embed ded and embod ied, rela tional and 
aﬀ ect ive carto graph ies of the new power 
rela tions that are emer ging. Signiﬁ cant 
markers of human ‘normal ity’ based on 
tradi tional views of class, race, gender, age 
and able- bodied ness continue to be at 
work as key factors in framing the notion 
of and poli cing access to some thing we 
may call ‘human’ or ‘human ity’. Th us, 
although there is no denying the global 
reach of the prob lems we are facing today, 
which indic ates that ‘we’ are in  this anthro-
po centric crisis together, it is equally true 
that such aware ness must not be allowed to 
ﬂ atten out the power diﬀ er en tials that 
sustain the collect ive subject (‘we’) and its 
endeav our (‘ this ’). We need sharper
INTRODUCTION 
angles and creat ive insights about aﬀ ect 
that are emer ging between theory, science 
and the arts. Our authors argue that these 
domains combine forces in address ing the 
chal lenge of our collect ive ‘ecopathy’. Or, 
to para phrase Donna Haraway: why are 
the machines so lively and the humans so 
inert? 
 Th e  Posthuman Glossary attempts to 
strike a balance between these multiple 
theor et ical lines, swinging moods and 
over- active inter dis cip lin ary hubs. Th e 
volume wants to think about and high light 
the inter con nec tion between our fascin a-
tion for novel tech no lo gical arte facts, 
envir on mental 
degrad a tion, 
economic 
dispar it ies, struc tural injustice and the 
recru des cence 
of 
power 
diﬀ er ences 
claimed to have been left  behind. In other 
words, the passion that sustains this 
volume is essen tially ethical: how can we 
come to terms with the breath tak ing trans-
form a tions of our times while being able to 
endure and to resist? How to keep in mind 
issues of social, femin ist, queer, trans, 
deco lo nial, anti- racist, inter- species, dis-
abil ity and transna tional justice while 
keeping pace with the amazing bio- 
scientiﬁ c, media and commu nic a tion, and 
the cognit ive tech no lo gical advances of 
our times? 
 Faced with such complex ity and the 
wealth of new perspect ives emer ging 
from posthu man invest ig a tions, another 
crucial ques tion that emerges from this 
gloss ary is whether multiple forms of 
altern at ive human isms – of the non-
Western; non- liberal; non- masculin ist; 
non- hetero sex ist; 
non- anthro po centric 
and non- imper ial kind – are feas ible today. 
And how would these inspir ing but poten-
tially contra dict ory approaches fare in the 
conﬂ ic tual geo- polit ical forum of today’s 
world? 
 Asking these ques tions across the 
multiple axes, the prolif er at ing gloss ar ies 
which induces addict ive habits of repe ti-
tion without diﬀ er ence. Deleuze and 
Guattari’s critique of capit al ism as schizo-
phrenia (1980) is a highly relev ant analysis 
of this perverse polit ical economy. 
 Th e posthu man is not only a mode of 
crit ical thought, but also a mood of aﬀ ect-
ive belong ing. It intro duces a multi- faceted 
‘aﬀ ect ive turn’ that combines emotions 
usually held as oppos ites: nostal gia with 
the passion for utopian vision; the polit ics 
of life itself with the spectre of mass extinc-
tion; 
melan cho lia 
with 
anti cip a tion; 
mourn ing for the past with a brutal ist 
passion for the not- yet. In this respect, 
Pathos and Th anatos stare at each other in 
the eyes while Eros looks away. Th e 
 Posthuman Glossary is as much a rhet or-
ical and aesthetic explor a tion of the 
posthu man condi tion as a literal descrip-
tion of its deﬁ n ing features and analytic 
condi tions of possib il ity. Th e eco- elegiac 
tone of some of our contrib ut ors is echoed 
by the ﬂ air for ‘eco- horror’ expressed by 
others. New aﬀ ects require new languages: 
what do you call that haunt ing feeling of 
ecolo gical memor ies of land scapes trans-
ﬁ gured by violent devel op ment? Eco- 
nostal gia? Remembrance of trees past? 
Geo- phys ical semi ot ics? Portrait of a 
young waste land? Colonial trans ﬁ g ur a-
tions? Scar wars? Terrestrial deli rium? And 
how should we describe that sinking 
feeling at the thought of the unsus tain ab il-
ity of our future? Post- anthro po centric 
nausea? Extinction- attrac tion syndrome? 
Global obscen it ies over load? No country 
for any human? 
 Th e aﬀ ect ive dimen sion is central to 
the aims of the  Posthuman Glossary and 
cannot be separ ated from concep tual 
creativ ity. In an era that is increas ingly 
deﬁ ned by the critique of anthro po centric 
apathy and the recog ni tion of the vital ity 
of matter and of non- human agency, this 
book wants to explore the new crit ical
contrib ute a ﬁ rst set of premises towards 
that kind of dialogue.
A 
 AFFECTIVE TURN  
 Can there be aﬀ ect without the human? To 
address this ques tion in the spirit of a gloss-
ary, let’s take these two keywords –  aﬀ ect 
and  posthu man – at face value. A paradox 
would seem impli cit in the pairing. 
Admittedly, there is no consensus on the 
meaning of aﬀ ect, even from within a single 
discip lin ary form a tion, whether it be philo-
sophy, cultural theory or psycho ana lysis. We 
can, however, distin guish those theor ists 
who make distinc tions between this concept 
and possible cognates – emotions, feel ings, 
moods, senti ments, etc. – from those who 
do not. Sianne Ngai’s  Ugly Feelings , a study 
that drew a long arc of the aﬀ ect ive turn in 
the early 2000s, exem pli ﬁ es the refusal to 
distin guish. ‘Feelings,’ ‘emotions’ and ‘aﬀ ects’ 
ﬂ ow inter change ably within Ngai’s work, a 
concep tual choice she addresses head- on: 
‘Th e diﬀ er ence between aﬀ ect and emotion 
is taken as a modal diﬀ er ence of intens ity or 
degree, rather than a formal diﬀ er ence of 
quality or kind’ (2005: 27). Emotions 
become – or ‘dena ture into’ (27) – aﬀ ects 
based on the degree to which they are artic-
ul able and narrat able. Th e continu ity 
between these terms suggests, at minimum, 
that aﬀ ect and emotion both revolve around 
a human perceiver and feeler. Th is human 
orient a tion is vital to the polit ical force 
Ngai’s theory carries.  Ugly Feelings rests on a 
histor ical argu ment, that late capit al ism has 
deformed the polit ical such that we must 
reckon with ‘less power ful’ – oft en ‘ugly’ – 
aﬀ ects such as anxiety and irrit a tion because 
these are the feel ings that are ‘perhaps more 
suited in their ambient, Bartlebyan, but still 
diagnostic nature, for models of subjectiv ity, 
collectiv ity, and agency not entirely fore seen 
by past theor ists’ (5). Ngai’s account of aﬀ ect 
and those it has inspired does not exfo li ate 
the agen tial human subject, even if states 
such as anxiety do, for a time, ‘suspend’ 
agency (1). 
 Perhaps those who more strictly delin-
eate aﬀ ect from its cognates decouple 
human ity from aﬀ ectiv ity more decis ively. 
Brian Massumi’s deﬁ n i tions of aﬀ ect and 
emotion have been germinal for aﬀ ect 
theory and would seem,  prima facie , to 
swerve from human ism into posthu man-
ism.  Parables for the Virtual and Massumi’s 
writ ings leading up to it estab lish ‘the 
autonomy of aﬀ ect’ (2002: 23). ‘An emotion 
is a subject ive content,’ he proposes, ‘the 
soci o lin guistic ﬁ xing of the quality of an 
exper i ence which is from that point onward 
deﬁ ned as personal . . . It is intens ity owned 
and recog nized’ (28). Aﬀ ect, by contrast, is 
‘unqual i ﬁ ed. As such, it is not ownable or 
recog niz able and is thus resist ant to critique’ 
(28). If aﬀ ect is not ‘owned’, perhaps it ﬂ oats 
free of a human possessor. But reading on, 
we learn that, though aﬀ ects are not recog-
nized cognit ively, they are still ‘irre du cibly 
bodily and auto nomic’ (28). Th e pre- or sub- 
personal quality of aﬀ ects does not, for that, 
make them posthu man.  1  
 When we consider not only how such 
germinal studies deﬁ ne aﬀ ect but also the 
style of many aﬀ ect studies, the human 
intrudes even more force fully. Th inkers
typic ally ﬁ nds in aﬀ ect theor ies that 
treat the stuﬀ  of the world – typic ally art 
objects and other people – as cata lysts for 
emotion. 
 How might aﬀ ect be a litmus test for 
inter spe cies – and even inter- matter – ani-
ma tion? In my study of contem por ary 
narrat ives of envir on mental and somatic 
sick ness, aﬀ ects like disgust that might seem 
infe li cit ous 
for 
feeling 
transcor por eal 
connec ted ness in fact make these ﬂ ows 
know able, if not predict able ( Houser 2014 ). 
For Matthew Taylor, the ‘ecopho bia’ that 
laces Edgar Allan Poe’s writing nour ishes an 
‘ecolo gical posthu man ism’ rather than 
human superi or ity and mastery (2013: 359). 
Aﬀ ectivity does not mark human unique-
ness. Th e world does not give us the choice 
of separ a tion and superi or ity, ecolo gical 
posthu man ists instruct. Care might not be 
the stance or ethic that results from the 
aﬀ ect ive messi ness through which beings 
exper i ence ‘the inex tric ab il ity of depend-
ency, the ines cap ab il ity of vulner ab il ity, the 
impossib il ity of mastery’ ( Taylor 2013 : 370). 
Whether through fear, disgust, anxiety or 
wonder, real iz ing vulner ab il ity is rarely an 
easy matter; it is just as prone to set more 
troub ling emotions into motion as it is to 
create comfort able rela tions. For the envir-
on mental human it ies, the aﬀ ect ive turn of 
the 2000s may not have made it any easier to 
be good toward (I use this phrase with all 
delib er ate naiveté) other ‘vital it ies’ ( Bennett 
2010 : xvii). It has, however, oﬀ ered ways of 
describ ing how feel ings seem ingly contained 
by the human show the errors in the very 
idea of contain ment. 
 See 
also 
Ecohorror; 
Ecomaterialism; 
Green/Environmental 
Humanities; 
Multispecies; Political Aﬀ ect; Precognition; 
Trans- corpor eal ity; Vibrant Matter.  
forming the ‘Public Feelings’ group – 
notably Lauren Berlant ( Cruel Optimism ), 
Ann Cvetkovich ( Depression ), José Esteban 
Muñoz ( Cruising Utopia ) and Kathleen 
Stewart ( Ordinary Aﬀ ects  ) – write from the 
embod ied ‘I,’ at times in an avowedly 
memoir istic mode. Th ese and gener ic ally 
similar 
studies 
substan ti ate 
Eugenie 
Brinkema’s point that the aﬀ ect ive turn 
has ‘a perform at ive dimen sion . . . that 
emphas izes the personal exper i ence of the 
theor ist’ and thus ‘preserve[s] a kernel of 
human ism’ at the core of its endeav our 
(2014: 31, 32). 
 Th e human, then, contam in ates aﬀ ect 
studies; across the diﬀ er ences between 
theor ists, this attrib ute makes the enter-
prise cohere. Looking to envir on mental 
cultural studies, aﬀ ect is the fulcrum for 
imagin ing posthu man ism as vulner ab il ity 
rather than as a state of being ‘not’, 
‘beyond’ or ‘aft er’ human ism. Th is strain of 
posthu man ist thought posits a pros thetic 
being deﬁ ned by ‘constitutive depend ency 
and ﬁ nitude’ ( Wolfe 2010 : xxvi) rather 
than a disem bod ied entity 2 or one opti-
mized by biotech no lo gical engin eer ing. 
A struc tur ing prob lem atic of aﬀ ect 
theory – the relays between subject and 
object – is constitutive for think ing post-
human ism from within envir on mental 
thought. In this intel lec tual tradi tion, the 
‘object’ typic ally belongs to the more- 
than-human realm of other animal species, 
plants, elements and forces. 3 Stacy Alaimo 
proposes ‘transcor por eal ity’ to ﬁ gure the 
permeab il ity of the membranes between 
humans and those others with which it is 
enmeshed. In her femin ist mater i al ist 
analysis, 
posthu man ism 
requires 
‘accountab[ility] to a mater ial world that 
is never merely an external place but 
always the very substance of ourselves and 
others’ ( Alaimo 2010 : 158). Th e human 
persists, but she is not alone. Her very 
mater i al ity is made of the stuﬀ  of the
AFROFUTURISM 
subject of the body cam or racial proﬁ l ing, 
the eﬃ   ciency of redlined pricing and 
other tech no lo gies that dispro por tion ately 
reduce the manoeuv rab il ity of black 
people. For tech no logy has been, and 
remains today, an insuﬃ   cient means of 
liber a tion for the black body. 
 Yet inter est ingly, since the projects of 
the Enlightenment and the tech no lo gical 
dysto pia called modern ity, the tech nical 
has also func tioned as the black body’s 
precise mode of collect ive depar ture. 
Technological spec u la tion, as a  tech niques 
of rela tion borrow ing from Massumi 
( Massumi and McKim 2009 ), oﬀ ers the 
black body a method by which the 
alien ness of terrestrial belong ing is re- 
scrip ted, re- coded and re- organ ized into 
altern at ive narrat ives of being and becom-
ing (see Akomfrah 1996). Dery calls this 
conver gence  Afrofuturism , which makes 
use of the suble git im acy of science ﬁ ction 
to form new entry points into self-
 repres ent a tion within black Diasporic 
exper i ence ( Nelson 2000 ;  Eshun 1999 ). 
 Although gener ally posi tioned within 
African-American liter ary, sonic and ﬁ lm 
culture, Afrofuturism, like science ﬁ ction, 
extends to global social plat forms, video, 
gaming, cosplay, graphic arts and other 
digital and geek ecolo gies. Afrofuturism 
can also be said to extend into the levels 
of sensa tion. According to cultural critic 
Greg Tate, ‘science ﬁ ction eschews the 
psycho lo gical dimen sion in terms of char-
ac ter portrayal for an all- encom passing 
look at the impact of the various insti tu-
tions that govern beha vior and the trans-
mis sion of know ledge’ (as quoted in  Dery 
1994 : 211). 
 Dery is considered the ﬁ rst to use the 
term  Afrofuturism . It is not, however, a new 
concept, but rather a gener at ive and heur-
istic move ment of black spec u lat ive 
perform ance that soli cits a do- it-yourself 
perspect ive to subject ive exper i ence (see
it ies of histor ical, spir itual and cultural 
situ ated ness ‘is not some thing that’s given 
to you insti tu tion ally; it’s an arduous 
journey that must be under taken by the 
indi vidual’ ( Dery 1994 : 210); even as the 
black body calls upon a collect ive cultural 
memory to capture new begin nings 
( Walker 2015 ). 
 Th is calls into ques tion how the black 
body is concep tu al ized in rela tion to ecolo-
gies of culture, and how the body gains a 
connec tion to self- determ in ing outcomes. 
Afrofuturism thus draws upon this tension 
in extend ing Afrocentrism towards a 
simu lated new begin ning based on a myth-
ical past of great ness. Technology then 
emerges at multiple sides of the obelisk – 
one in a histor ical rela tion ship with the 
subjec tion of a peoples and another in 
concert with their deliv er ance through 
self- discov ery. 
 Th e aesthetic, however, does not seek to 
change history per se, but to estab lish a 
future where people of African descent are 
central to their own stories. Black iden tity, 
as such, is an abstrac tion, a language that 
has neither corpor eal form nor tran scend-
ental ground ing. Blackness is concep tu al-
ized and continu ally recon struc ted in the 
process of doing, being black, always in 
rela tion to but not depend ent on the 
ﬁ ctions of race or racism. Even so, black 
iden tity is oft en repres en ted as exist ing 
within two states: (1) a histor ical enun ci-
ation repres en ted by spatio- temporal posi-
tion ing among other racial ized assemblages; 
and (2) aesthetic markers, like Afrofuturism 
that serve as new poten ti al it ies of subject ive 
under stand ing. 
 It is here, at the junc tion of encounter 
and context, that Félix Guattari views the 
racial ized group as assign ing meaning. Th is 
meaning is a force that ‘consti tutes the seeds 
of the produc tion of subjectiv ity’, as ‘we are 
not in the pres ence of a pass ively repres ent-
at ive image, but a vector of subjectiv a tion’ 
 Eshun 1999 ). Th is is seen most readily in 
the black ﬁ ction works of Mark Sinker, 
Richard Wright, Amiri Baraka and earlier 
contri bu tions by Octavia Butler and 
Samuel R. Delany, not to mention Sun Ra’s 
 Space Is Th e Place , George Clinton and his 
bands Parliament and Funkadelic, Afrika 
Bambaataa and all of the margins of black 
perform ance in between. 
 Th ese cultural endow ments are not to 
over shadow the current tech no cul tural 
exper i ments in art, and in sonic and liter ary 
culture by author Ingrid Laﬂ eur and 
singer Janelle Monáe, online Afrofuturist 
communit ies founded by Alondra Nelson 
and Art McGee, artists Juliana Huxtable, 
Rasheedah Phillips, Eddy Kamuanga Ilunga, 
performer M. Lamar, or the late dubstep 
artist Th e Spaceape. 
 Afrofuturism oper ates at the inter sec-
tions of history, spec u la tion and perform-
ance – within modes of poten tial – to 
develop a meth od o lo gical imme di acy that 
combines the spec u lat ive suﬃ   ciency of 
fantasy, ﬁ ction, perform ance and other 
tech no cul tural reﬂ ec tions with histor ical 
modes of suﬀ er ings and displace ments. 
Th e purpose is to imagine new rela tional 
frame works. In a way, Afrofuturists seek to 
under stand where the black body ends and 
repres ent a tion begins; and how the impos-
i tion of histor ical circum stance emerges as 
a polit ics of present and future collect ive 
belong ing. 
 Afrofuturism, however, is fore most a 
human ist agenda. What is of partic u lar 
interest in Afrofuturism is its draw upon 
futur ity’s Zionist promise – in conver gence 
with Pan-Africanism and Afrocentrism – 
to recon cep tu al ize altern at ive self- repres-
ent a tions. Central here is a symbi otic 
cohe sion between the self- direc ted trans-
form a tion of the indi vidual and the 
connect ive prop er ties of black conscious-
ness. Greg Tate reminds us that knowing 
your self as a black person in the complex-
AFROFUTURISM 
place a peoples’ history into celeb ra tions of 
future possib il it ies. Esedebe has valid ity 
despite relying on what Gilroy ( 1987 ) calls 
an ‘ethnic abso lut ism’ to reima gine black 
iden tity. Just as Afrofuturism risks being 
reduced to a reﬂ ec tion of the exist ing 
world, reﬂ ec tion is precisely what moves 
Afrofuturism into the contin gen cies of 
other- world ness 
that 
allow 
for 
the 
ether eal to artic u late itself both in seas 
of dark ness and in the bright ness of the 
sun. Still, perhaps neither dicho tomy is 
adequate, as the nuances that comprise 
collect ive belong ing are captured no more 
neatly into ideas of black ness than they are 
suﬃ   cient descrip tions of Afrofuturism – 
even if the resi li ence of black culture and 
black life is about ‘imagin ing the impossible, 
imagin ing a better place, a diﬀ er ent world’. 1 
Aft er all, each Afrofuturist expres sion is 
collect ive only in as much as it can’t be 
repres en ted. 
 Science ﬁ ction writer Samuel R. Delany 
reminds us that 
  one of the most force ful and distin guish-
ing aspects of science ﬁ ction is that it’s 
marginal. It’s always at its most honest 
and most eﬀ ect ive when it oper ates – and 
claims to be oper at ing – from the margins 
. . . I don’t want to see it operate from 
anyone’s center: black nation al ism’s, 
femin ism’s, gay rights’, pro- tech no logy 
move ments’, ecology move ments’, or 
any other center
 Dery 1994 : 189 
 According to Ytasha Womack ( 2013 ), 
Afrofuturism is an appar atus by which a 
non- linear and ﬂ uid imagin ary emerges. 
But how does one remain at the margins 
without recap tur ing new, equally volat ile 
forms 
of 
repres ent a tion? 
All 
this 
considered, Afrofuturism might be best 
illus trated 
by 
the 
impossib il ity 
of 
black ness, the impossib il ity of being 
black, an impossible engage ment with 
( Guattari 1995 : 29–30). It is through the 
meaning of black ness that the black, 
brown and other subjec ted indi vidual 
creates a cohe sion of (mis)repres ent a tion, 
expounded by aesthetic markers, dynamic 
vibra tions and a cultural kinet i cism oft en 
expressed as a sense of belong ing. 
 Nonetheless, Afrofuturism’s fragil ity 
comes from liber a tion- based ideo lo gies 
found in black iden tity polit ics. Here, a 
commit ment to the idea of race and 
ethnic- based cent ral ity is thought essen tial 
to tech niques of survival (see  Bogues 2003 ; 
 Morrison 1992 ;  West 1989 ). Racial iden tity 
then becomes a source of secur ity, as a 
body polit ics nonethe less, that implies 
the stabil ity of black iden tity in denial of 
race as an ever- shift  ing tech no lo gical 
artic u la tion of wider ecolo gical rela tions. 
Critics also argue that Afrocentric logics 
are vulner able to cultural norm ativ it ies 
that extend beyond the repres ent a tional 
and symbolic. Marlon Riggs, Michelle 
Wallace, Angela Davis and bell hooks 
have already illus trated the dangers of 
compos ing a black ness in which queer-
ness, gender open ness, trans lives and 
other non- linear align ments are fore closed 
in eﬀ orts to main tain the rigid it ies of self- 
refer en ti al ity (Riggs 1994). Th is, then, 
raises the follow ing ques tion: if Sun Ra had 
succeeded in taking us to Jupiter or his 
self- proclaimed home planet of Saturn or 
if George Clinton and Parliament had 
been taken up on their invit a tion to ride 
the mother ship, which of us would be left  
behind? 
 Central to this ques tion are reﬂ ec tions 
on the role of history in pre- empting 
the future, and the lens through which 
poten tial futures are performed and 
assessed. Afrofuturism oﬀ ers a breach in 
the tech nique of rela tion to celeb rate the 
awkward ness and disjoin ted ness of culture, 
or, as Esedebe ( 1994 ) argues, of black cent-
ral it ies. Th e myth ical narrat ive is enough to
AHUMAN, THE
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 Ahuman theory comes from two 
motives. Th e ﬁ rst is the increas ing move-
ment from animal rights to abso lute 
abol i tion. Animal rights tradi tion ally 
serves the interests of nonhu mans based 
on equi val ences with humans and is a 
ﬂ awed polit ics of equal ity (equal to the 
human) rather than diﬀ er ence. Abolition 
sees the rights of any entity based on not 
what it is but that it is. Human compul-
sions to deﬁ ne animal rights deﬁ ne the 
animal, and the discourse is ulti mately one 
between humans and their domin ant 
percep tions of nonhu man entit ies in order 
to vindic ate their exploit a tion of those 
entit ies. So all animal studies is inher ently 
human studies between humans of the 
other and has no non human beneﬁ t 
except in its capa city to cata lyse humans 
to stop being human. In animal rights 
and animal studies the nonhu man is 
imposed within a struc ture for which it 
has neither given consent nor has the 
power of address and for this reason 
becomes the  diﬀ  er end aft er Lyotard’s 
( 1988 ) descrip tion of the victim who 
cannot be plaintiﬀ  because it cannot 
manip u late the master’s discourse. 
 Abolitionists are activ ists against all use 
of animals, acknow ledging commu nic a-
tion is fatally human, so we can never 
know modes of nonhu man commu-
nication and to do so is both hubris and 
mater i ally detri mental to nonhu mans. 
Abolitionists advoc ate the end of all use of 
all animals for all purposes and select 
words to exchange for those in circu la tion 
in describ ing the oppres sion of non-
humans – ‘food’ (canni bal ism for meat, 
rape and theft  and murder of young for 
dairy and chicken use, murder), ‘enter tain-
ment’ (enslave ment), ‘research’ (torture) and 
so forth. Abolitionist philo soph ers are also 
against the fetish isa tion of nonhu mans 
in posthu man becom ings and refuse the 
use of human percep tions of nonhu man 
the self and other, or as Sun Ra explains: 
‘some thing that’s so impossible . . . it can’t 
possibly be true’ (as quoted in  Corbett 
1994 : 311) – a hetero to pia in the 
Foucauldian sense, or a black resist ance as 
a way of living already present and still yet 
to exist. 
 See 
also 
Alienation; 
Necropolitics; 
Posthumanist Performativity; Decolonial 
Critique; Real Cool Ethics. 
 Note 
 1. 
Interview 
with 
Alondra 
Nelson, 
 Afrofuturism , Soho Repertory Th eater, 
2010, 
 https://youtu.
be/ IF hEjaal5js  [accessed 13 February 
2017].    
 Ramon Amaro 
 AHUMAN, THE  
 Th e ahuman is a concept coined in the 2014 
collec ted antho logy  Th e Animal Catalyst: 
Toward Ahuman Th eory . It sees post-
human ism in a para bolic conﬁ g ur a tion 
to chal lenge both the evol u tion ary mono-
dir ec tional linear ity of cyber biotech nic- 
based posthu man ism and the increas ing 
use of nonhu man animals in post-
humanism as a devol u tion ary meta phor. 
Th e ahuman’s para bola has in one direc tion 
nonhu man animals and in the other some-
thing which refuses the priv ilege and signi-
fy ing systems of the human but does not 
insti tute a new version of posthu man ism 
which would continue those tend en cies 
albeit in a mutated form. Th e apex of the 
para bola is the (now defunct myth of 
the) human. Th e nonhu man animal and 
the ahuman are thus close in prox im ity but 
abso lutely extric ated from each other 
simul tan eously.
AI (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE) 
 1. See Church of Euthanasia,  http://
churcho feuthanasia.org. 
 Patricia MacCormack 
 AI (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE)  
 In 1955, American computer scient ist and 
cognit iv ist scient ist John McCarthy inven-
ted the term Artiﬁ cial Intelligence to 
describe machines designed to be intel li-
gent agents equipped with beliefs systems. 
With the prolif er a tion of auto mated 
machines programmed to accom plish 
tasks and carry out func tions without 
super vi sion, from the ther mo stat to soft -
ware updat ing on your computer, this 
rich ﬁ eld of research has mani fes ted the 
cultural imagin ary of a techno- social 
intel li gence emer ging from the human 
invest ment in instru mental think ing. With 
the algorith mic ally driven processing of 
know ledge 
and 
commu nic a tion, 
this 
imagin ary has under gone a profound 
change and become an epitome of a 
primary onto lo gical ques tion: what is the 
being of thought? 
 In the last thirty years, auto ma tion has 
achieved an irre vers ible re- model ling and 
acquired a dynamic quality whereby its 
mech an ical repe ti tious tasks no longer 
deﬁ ne its func tion. Th ese new logical 
possib il it ies avail able to a machine today 
could be grasped from within the cultural 
imagin ary, for instance if one simply juxta-
poses the cine mat ic ally reﬁ ned artic u la-
tions of arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence in Kubrick’s 
 2001: A Space Odyssey  ( 1968 ) and in 
Garland’s  Ex Machina ( 2015 ). In partic u lar, 
one cannot over look the strik ing contrast 
between Hal, the sentient intel li gence of 
the space ship based on logical rules that 
exclude its fallib il ity, and Ava, the arti ﬁ  cial 
intel li gent android programmed to break 
systems and entit ies as assim il at ive and co- 
optive. In both incarn a tions, abol i tion ism 
remains antag on istic to and is considered 
radical by animal rights, animal studies 
and etho logy in its refusal to utilize 
animals. Abolition, aft er Serres, follows the 
tenets of symbi osis which is a form of 
neces sary care and grace which is a leaving 
(to) be in refer ence to human–nonhu man 
inev it able inter ac tion – a natural contract 
(see also becom ing- world) which over-
throws the entirely social contract within 
which most current debates around 
nonhu man entit ies occurs and which thus 
will always exclude them. 
 Th e second motive for ahuman theory 
nego ti ates the ques tion of what becomes of 
the human when it is neither posthu man 
cyborg nor animal fetish ist. We remain 
non- nonhu man animals yet we must still 
acknow ledge our biolo gical organ ism’s 
place within the ecosoph ical series of 
rela tions (see cosmo logy). Ahuman theory 
promotes cata lys ing becom ing- other from 
the major it arian or all human priv ilege 
and renoun cing the bene ﬁ ts of the 
Anthropocene. Th is can occur in inﬁ n ite 
ways. Some of the sugges tions oﬀ ered 
include the use of all mani fest a tions of art to 
form new terrains of appre hen sion of the 
world and encour age new ethical rela tions 
between entit ies, the cessa tion of repro duc-
tion toward an end of the human as a para-
sitic detri mental species (see extinc tion), 
and think ing diﬀ er ently about death by 
advoc at ing for suicide, euthanasia  1 and a 
good life over biotech no lo gies’ drive for 
immor tal ity. However, these are few of any 
variety of tactics which could shift  human 
signi fy ing systems toward ahuman asemi-
otic reter rit ori al iz a tions of connectiv ity and 
novel parti cip a tions. 
 See also Animal; Animism; Ecohorror; 
Cosmopolitics; In/Human; In-Human; 
Extinction.
AI (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE)
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 In the late 1980s and 1990s, aft er the so- 
called ‘ AI winter’, new models of  AI research 
addressed sub- symbolic mani fest a tions of 
intel li gence and adopted non- deduct ive 
and heur istic methods to be able to deal 
with uncer tain or incom plete inform a tion. 
Boxing away symbolic logic,  AI systems 
emerged that were able to learn directly 
by trial and error by inter act ing with the 
envir on ment. Th ese embed ded agents are 
learn ing machines retriev ing inform a tion 
through sensory- motor responses that 
enable agents to map and navig ate space by 
construct ing neural connec tions amongst 
inter act ive nodes. Central to these models is 
the idea that intel li gence is not a top- down 
program to execute, but that auto mated 
systems need to develop intel li gent skills 
char ac ter ized by speedy, non- conscious, 
non- hier arch ical orders of decision based 
on an inter act ive retrieval of inform a tion 
sorted out by means of trial- and-error 
attempts at determ in ing func tions. Statistical 
approaches were partic u larly central to 
this shift  towards non- deduct ive logic and 
the expan sion of an ampli at ive or non- 
mono tonic processing of inform a tion. 
 General methods for includ ing the 
compu ta tion of uncer tainty even tu ally 
became domin ant in models of prob ab il-
istic reas on ing. Th e error, uncer tainty or 
fallib il ity of compu ta tion no longer 
demarc ated the limit of  AI , but the limit of 
the mech an iz a tion of deduct ive logic in 
 AI . As opposed to deduct ive logic, non- 
mono tonic 
think ing 
(induc tion 
and 
abduc tion) is the process by which infer-
ences or the process of explain ing how one 
truth is contained into another starts with 
a hypo thet ical state ment or an elab or a tion 
of the uncer tain ties embed ded into the 
mater ial world. Conjecturing hypo theses 
to explain unknown phenom ena is the 
process by which what is known of exist-
ing condi tions is over lapped by a spec u lat-
ive tend ency towards another state ment 
the Turing Test (i.e. to pass as a sapient 
agent able to reason beyond any reli able 
respons ive dispos i tion). Th e  AI Hal here 
imper son ates the logical model of so- called 
‘high church compu ta tion al ism’ and also a 
strong  AI thesis (i.e. the idea that machines 
can 
over come 
human 
intel li gence), 
sustained by a repres ent a tional model of 
think ing, which was based on the analo-
gical asso ci ation between symbolic struc-
tures and neuro bi o lo gic ally encoded and 
thus comput able concepts (i.e. calcul able 
because deriv able from given premises). 
Algorithms were here programmed on the 
model of deduct ive or mono tonic logic, 
char ac ter ised by a step- by-step proced ure 
and consequen tial reas on ing aiming to 
solve prob lems that could be justi ﬁ ed 
within the frame work of pre- estab lished 
axioms or truths. 
 In the instance of  2001: A Space 
Odyssey , the  AI  Hal insists that its logical 
proced ures could not fail and that that 
the central system  HAL 9000 backups 
had failed because of the error- prone 
activ it ies of human beha viour. Unable to 
under stand that the machine deduct ive 
reas on ing was limited and could fail, 
Hal decides to elim in ate human errors 
by plot ting to kill the space ship’s astro-
nauts. Famously inspired by American 
cognit iv ist scient ist Marvin Lee Minksy, 
the failure of the  AI Hal was rather 
suppor ted by the then scientiﬁ c belief 
that  AI ’s logical model of intel li gence was 
unable to deal with contin gen cies and 
with 
think ing 
beyond 
rule- obeying 
conduct. Hal was supposed to behave like a 
neural network that could grow arti ﬁ  cial 
intel li gence by exactly mirror ing the 
growth of human brains. In the book 
 Perceptrons , Minsky claimed that a single 
neuron could only compute a small 
number of logical predic ates in any given 
case, and casted a long shadow on neural 
network research in the 1970s.
ALGORITHM 
comput ing, and general arti ﬁ  cial intel li-
gence. Diﬀ erently from Hal, these contem-
por ary forms of collect ive think ing 
machines are not stopped by para doxes 
and neut ral ized by fallib il ity. Instead, inde-
term in acy and uncer tainty are incent ives 
for the devel op ment of their task of 
synthes iz ing random ness through predic-
tion as they grow their learn ing possib il it-
ies and become able to include error within 
their oper at ive func tions. Th is is where 
Ava in  Ex Machina shows us how to break 
the Turing Test and casts her spell on the 
truth of think ing as being not bounded to 
human sapi ence by neces sity. Instead, with 
Ava, the exist en tial condi tion of machines 
seems to paral lel in another dimen sion the 
condi tion of a prim or dial exist ence of 
human know ledge that the scenes about 
the mono lith found on the moon in  2001 
instan ti ate. Th e compu ta tional age of  AI 
demarc ates the raise of an inform a tional 
stratum whose logical oper a tions are not 
simply symbolic or static modes of under-
stand ing. Instead, Ava’s mission of persuad-
ing a human to set her free shows us how 
the task of processing uncer tainty is 
central to a general form of arti ﬁ  cial think-
ing. Th e real iz a tion of think ing in machines 
shows us that intel li gence is primar ily an 
alien aﬀ air, an engine of abstrac tion forcing 
a constant de- natur al iz a tion from what is 
given. 
 See also Computational Turn; Non-
Human Agency; Extended Cognition; 
Neocybernetics; 
Networked 
Aﬀ ect; 
Robophilosophy. 
 Luciana Parisi 
 ALGORITHM  
 Perhaps the most present forms of 
algorithms, present in the conscious 
that adds on, enters into dialogue with and 
exposes a forward- order of explan a tion. 
Here what is given is not known unless it 
becomes abstrac ted from its partic u lar loci 
so that it is possible to return to it from 
another stand point, a meta- rela tional view. 
With non- mono tonic logic, the ingres sion 
of uncer tain ties into what is given is not 
geared to prove an exist ing truth, but to 
expand its methods of explan a tion so as to 
achieve the determ in a tion of new truths. 
Such logic is evol u tion ary. 
 In  AI research the devel op ment of 
prob ab il istic think ing has simil arly seen a 
crucial over lap ping between stat ist ical 
methods based on given prob ab il it ies and 
strategies of search ing the most prob able 
outcomes through the abstrac tion of inﬁ n-
ite vari et ies from a given set of data. Th is 
process of abstrac tion is compu ta tional 
(see compu ta tional turn) and is deﬁ ned by 
the logical proced ures of its func tions 
carried out by algorithms. Th e latter are 
iter at ive patterns emer ging from the 
induct ive and heur istic methods of sub- 
symbolic intel li gence, informed, as it were, 
by the data envir on ment through which 
they operate. Algorithmic logic, however, is 
also determ ined by the stat ist ical compu-
ta tions of inde term in ate outcomes, where 
what is prob able is better under stood in 
terms of predict ive think ing. Prediction 
indeed is central to the temporal activ it ies 
of think ing insofar as it demarc ates the 
synthetic processing of inﬁ n ite quant it ies 
of inform a tion through which think ing 
leads to acting. Prediction and not prob ab-
il ity is central to the dynamic auto ma tion 
of the new gener a tions of  AI . 
 Inductive and heur istic methods of 
logic in auto mated systems together with 
predict ive control mech an isms have been 
adopted in auto mated plan ning, natural 
language processing, machine percep tion, 
speech recog ni tion, robot ics, machine 
learn ing, social intel li gence or aﬀ ect ive
instruc tions – in execu tion – for the doing 
or making of some thing, which includes 
neces sary 
elements, 
constraints 
and 
proced ure, taken together dynam ic ally. 
Oft en when deﬁ n i tions of algorithms are 
oﬀ ered to a non- tech nical audi ence, the 
algorithm cooks up through the meta phor 
of the recipe and its rela tion to baking. Th e 
list of ingredi ents corres ponds to input, a 
data set and/or vari ables, and the step- by-
step instruc tions for mixing, blend ing, 
sift ing, blanch ing and heating food 
ingredi ents corres ponds to the proced ural, 
embed ded, nested, iter at ive and return 
commands composed through code. And 
just as the recipe for pumpkin bread is not 
the baked pumpkin bread, the code itself 
is not algorithmic until it is run. Th e 
mater i al iz a tion of pumpkin bread, or a 
Google search, is in its execu tion, an intra- 
action instan ti ated through partic u lar 
mater i al it ies, at once discrete and modular. 
Th e previ ous sentence suggests that for our 
meta phoric equi val ence to remain true, 
pumpkin bread might easily, but with a 
diﬀ er ence of an ingredi ent, become banana 
bread. But it doesn’t. Th e mater i al ity of 
banana does not  equate to pumpkin. Th e 
spices 
comple ment ing 
pumpkin 
and 
banana, while shared in part, diﬀ er. Th e 
chem istry of baking bananas is closer to 
that of baking eggs than pump kins. Th e 
point here is bela boured precisely to point 
to the mater ial diﬀ er ences and aﬀ ord ances 
of analogue algorithms and compu ta tional 
algorithms. 
 Th e chem istry of baking pumpkin 
bread, includ ing heat and tempor al ity, 
oper ates through a tracing of the com-
binat or ial rhythms of the matters of ﬂ our, 
baking powder and soda, sugars, spices,
 oils and/or butter, eggs and/or bananas 
and sugar pumpkin. Even in this list, 
ingredi ents and process diﬀ er if the 
pumpkin bread comes into being as the 
tracing of vegan and purely veget at ive 
aware ness of most compu ta tional and 
inter net users, occur in corpor ate app and 
inter face rela tion ships: the Google search 
algorithm provid ing ranked (ordered) 
results; 
recom mend a tions 
for 
future 
purchases from Amazon, eBay or Alibaba 
based on indices of implic a tion of purchas-
ing habits; Facebook status update streams, 
queued and delivered as cues for recip roc-
a tion and circu la tion; ad place ment in the 
sidebar of Gmail and many ‘free’ commu-
nic a tions apps, return ing bits (and bytes) of 
your messages as poten tial oppor tun it ies 
to push commu nic a tions into ﬁ nan cial 
exchange. Th e func tion al it ies of these 
algorithms, by design, appear and engage at 
friendly levels of human percep tion. Th e 
levels of abstrac tion, the func tion al it ies of 
code, the rela tions of code and hard ware 
and human somat ics, and the tempor al it ies 
of compu ta tion and inter net trans mis sion 
do not appear, do not engage nor operate at 
friendly or at any conscious level of human 
percep tion. In this human imper cept ib il ity 
in service to circu la tion and value extrac-
tion, the compu ta tional algorithm oﬀ ers 
itself as an arte fact of the posthu man and 
the Capitalocene. 
 For many users, crit ical know ledge of 
this arte fac tu al ity is conscious, if not 
consen sual, but the mater i al ity, func tion al-
it ies and modal it ies of algorithms remain, 
in the most classic sense of the term, black- 
boxed, a knowing by demon strated eﬀ ects 
without compre hen sion of process. And 
demon strated eﬀ ects consti tute only a 
small inter sec tion of designed (includ ing 
non- conscious) aﬀ ects: desir ing, somatic 
and rhythmic. But in order to arrive at this 
entan gle ment of eﬀ ects and aﬀ ects, the box 
must be opened and a simple turn to basic 
ques tions must be made: ‘What is an 
algorithm? What can they do? What do 
they make?’ 
 An algorithm, in itself, is not compu ta-
tional. It is a set of modular or autonom ous
ALGORITHM 
of the second line speciﬁ es the process 
that the ingredi ent or vari able will 
undergo, a = a + 1, which on the ﬁ rst 
iter a tion (and all subsequent ones) 
means that every time the ‘a’ is thrown 
in the mix, it will be increased by one, 
a = 0 + 1 [there fore aft er the ﬁ rst run, 
a = 1]. Th e curly brack ets work like a 
bowl, contain ing the results of our loop. So 
the machine ‘prints’ ‘1,’, but most import-
antly, this ‘for’ demands we stay in its loop 
until ‘a’ exceeds 100. So the bowl, the print 
func tion, will be ﬁ lled until a = 100, and 
the machine will print ‘1, 2, 3, [. . .], 100’ 
and then stop. Th is result will happen in 
less than a second aft er hitting the ‘run’ or 
‘go’ feature without any neces sary under-
stand ing of the count ing and tempor al ity, 
condi tion and constraint, or design of the 
output. Th is result is  not the process. 
Neither is the explan a tion of the syntax of 
the algorithm. 
 Each char ac ter, moment of syntax and 
system func tion (‘for’) in this very simple 
bit of pseudo- code – in execu tion – is 
some thing quite diﬀ er ent  for the machine . 
Th e ‘a’, the ‘=’, and the ‘0’ of the ﬁ rst line are 
bundled bytes, code within code, corres-
pond ing to an elec tri ﬁ ed arrange ment of 
circuits, a tempor ary and stilled burn in 
memory. Th e ‘for’, the ‘a <= 100’, etc., are 
nested 
func tions, 
bundles 
of 
code 
within bundles of nested code, that make ‘a’ 
circuits dance, move, change, char ging and 
dechar ging, a rhythmic burn, unburn, burn 
inher ent in the very mater i al ity of the 
circuits. As the ‘a’ counts, iter ates to 100, the 
machine reson ates, vibrates, heats, charges, 
discharges. An algorithm is more accur-
ately under stood as an algoRhythm, mater-
ial charges, reson ances, tempor al it ies in the 
guts of the machine, and also direc ted and 
designed charges, reson ances and tem por-
al it ies distrib uted across and through its 
rhyth mic ally ener gized and promis cu ous 
inter faces, deeply compat ible across and 
mater ial rhythms, oil not butter, bananas 
not eggs, or as the tracing of a concat en a-
tion of animal and veget at ive mater ial 
rhythms. Th ese mater ial rhythmic diﬀ er-
ences might be thought of, with  substan tial 
abstrac tion, 
as 
diﬀ er ences 
between 
compos ing func tion al ity through the 
mater ial rhythms for an Android device 
versus an Apple  OS device. And the 
meta phor might extend even further to 
capture uncon scious eﬀ ects and aﬀ ects: 
the baked sugar–carbo hydrate compounds 
of pumpkin bread digest ively enter ing 
a human body increases rates and 
volumes of blood sugar, speed ing meta bol-
ism followed by a triggered insulin 
response, which slows and dulls the 
body and brain func tion (and much 
much more . . .). Relations of speed and 
slow ness, rhythms of complex intra- active 
matters, con stitutive of  a body . Th is 
rhythmic mater ial process, percept ible in 
part, known by its eﬀ ects and aﬀ ects, quite 
liter ally oper ates at the tempor al it ies of the 
human, the body, not just and not wholly 
conscious ness. 
 But what of the mater ial rhythms of 
compu ta tional algorithms? What digest ive 
correl ate that doesn’t suggest eating a 
compu ta tional device? To be expli cit, 
compu ta tional algorithms run, and only 
run, on compu ta tional devices. A pseudo- 
code example (a partial code/natural 
language artic u la tion of an algorithm/
func tion): 
 a = 0; 
 for (a <= 100; a = a + 1) { 
   print (a, “, ”) }; 
 Machines read one line at a time, top to 
bottom, unless redir ec ted. Th e ﬁ rst line, 
a = 0, is an ingredi ent, or the declar a tion 
of a vari able. Th e ﬁ rst part of the second 
line tells the machine  how long to cook for, 
a <= 100, or as long as a is less than 
or equal to 100. It  counts . Th e second part
anim al ity, the human and the non- human 
– clas sical binary oppos i tions unhinged by 
the ubiquit ous inter ven tion of tech no lo-
gical medi ation. By devel op ing sensorial 
capa cit ies and evol u tion ary ‘smart ness’, 
digital tech no lo gies make possible and 
mater i al ize another condi tion of Being 
between (or beyond?) the human and the 
animal, coin cid ing with neither but 
aﬀ ect ing both. Th ese tech no lo gies pervade 
our ﬂ esh and fuse with our skin and 
blood; they re- wire our neural networks 
and alter our thought patterns, even as 
objects acquire ever- increas ing capab il it ies 
for intel li gent learn ing, reac tion, judge-
ment 
and 
response. 
Th ese 
changes 
profoundly aﬀ ect the conscious ness, the 
sensorium, the evol u tion and the cogni tion 
of both human and non- human agents. 
Even that binary may no longer hold: 
might we start to think about the digital in 
an  ahuman  form – a digital agent in its own 
right, with its own intel li gib il ity, whose 
sense of the world is genu inely beyond the 
anthro po centric? 
 A key element of this shift  of perspect-
ive and possib il ity towards this other 
deﬁ n i tion of Being is the compu ta tional 
algorithm, brieﬂ y deﬁ ned as the instruc-
tions or rules written in an appro pri ate 
language for a computer to process a 
task and, subsequently, to perform or 
execute it. As digital tech no logy takes its 
place in the new ternary (with human ity 
and anim al ity) it accom plishes a double 
feat. Th e algorithm takes on a life of its 
own, but it also takes on our lives, to the 
extent that we can begin to speak of 
algorithmic life itself and its condi tions 
across its many instan ti ations in the world. 
As compu ta tional culture shift s and 
evolves, we can begin to clarify not only 
the state of the algorithmic condi tions in 
twenty- ﬁ rst-century living, but also to 
identify the mishaps and the ways in 
through human somatic charge, bio- 
rhythms, aﬀ ect ive–aesthetic attend an cies. 
Under a second. Black- boxed, in conscious 
eﬀ ects, exceeded in non- conscious aﬀ ects. 
Bodies, in motion and rest, constraint and 
design, ener get ics and discrete mater i al it-
ies, intra- actions, modular, autonom ous 
func tions and somatic aﬀ ec tions. 
 Swipe. Click. Hold. Check. Checksum. 
Check. Like. Buy now. 
 Posthuman algoRhythms. 
 Google’s inva sion of our data privacy 
doesn’t even begin to scratch the skin. 
 See also  Computational Turn; Altergorithm; 
Algorithmic 
Studies; 
 AI 
(Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence), Informatic Opacity, Metadata 
Society, Networked Aﬀ ect, Non- human 
Agency, Posthuman Ethics. 
 Jamie ‘Skye’ Bianco 
 ALGORITHMIC STUDIES  
 Algorithmic studies rest on the epistem o-
lo gical asser tion that digital tech no lo gies 
remodel the condi tions of possib il ity for a 
number of crucial discurs ive and mater ial 
prac tices. Th ese prac tices and their modes 
of produc tion, repres ent a tion, distri bu tion 
and circu la tion include the deﬁ n i tion of 
Being, the struc tur ing of the Social, the 
instru ment al iz a tion of the Political and 
the anim a tion of the Cultural. Th rough 
intense inter ven tions into the very struc-
ture of these key concep tual prac tices, they 
re- tool – and in many ways manu fac ture 
anew – the very nature of what we under-
stand as life itself. 
 Bruno Latour and Eduardo Viveiros de 
Castro, among others, have commen ted on 
the signi ﬁ c ant shift s under gone by categor-
ical distinc tions that had been upheld with 
relat ive stabil ity within the western project 
of modern ity. Consider the growing indis-
ALGORITHMIC STUDIES 
know ledge, its epistemic form a tions 
and formu la tions. 
 
  AS is the study of algorith mic ally 
produced networks, the machinic 
produc tion and inter- commu nic a tion 
of networked machines.  AS is, thus, the 
study of algorith mic ally enabled 
machine life. 
 
 AS  is the study of the algorithmic 
subject: the social and polit ical 
subject produced by and repro du cing 
algorithmic prac tice, and its modes 
of being, doing, and becom ing. 
 
  AS is the study of the algorith mic ally 
compelled (pre-)dict able futures, 
the consum ing subjectiv it ies it 
struc tures. 
 
  AS accord ingly is the crit ical study of 
the algorith mic ally modelled restruc-
tur ing of agency and its loss, autonomy 
and its stric tures and restric tions. 
 
 AS , in short, is the critique of 
algorithmic capit al ism, its mode of 
produc tion, being and subjectiv it ies; of 
trans it ory life; of consum ing life; of 
polit ical culture and cultural polit ics. 
 
 AS is the study of the increas ing 
trans it iv ity of data- ﬁ ed social life, its 
coding, its codes, and its applic a tions: 
the algorithmic. 
 See 
also  
Algorithm; 
Altergorithm; 
Computational Turn; Feminist Posthu-
manities; Postdisciplinarity; Tolerances 
and Duration.
for example, when we only have access to, 
and a say in, a small part of a pro ductive 
process, or when the product of our 
work becomes a mere commod ity, rather 
than some thing of shared social use. We 
are alien ated from ourselves, when we 
are either forced into, or acqui esce to, 
becom ing a thing rather than a communal 
actor; for example, when we think of 
ourselves as our price, or as our market-
abil ity. 
 According to these points of view, alien-
a tion depends on what we really are and on 
how we are kept from that – by capit al ism 
and by tradi tion, for instance. Th is more 
subtle under stand ing of alien a tion reverses 
the criti cism that can be made against the 
posthu man as alien at ing idea and process. 
It is the idea of the human that is alien at-
ing, because it imposes a false repres ent a-
tion on exist ence. We are not indi vidual 
and self- contained beings, deﬁ ned by a 
core essence, ideal, conscious ness or body. 
We are multiple processes connec ted 
across diﬀ er ent forms and places. When 
those processes are denied, when an alli-
ance with animals, or a depend ence on 
tech no logy, or a multi- agent coali tion, is 
deﬁ ned as a distor tion of a prop erly human 
core, then there is alien a tion. 
 True alien a tion happens when we cling 
to the human, against assemblages and 
forces that consti tute us as posthu man 
processes of trans form a tion. When alien a-
tion is deﬁ ned in terms of being and prop-
erty, we are led to think of the human as 
static, in the sense of having a partic u lar 
ﬁ xed state or ﬁ xed belong ings and char ac-
ter ist ics. Th is thought is itself alien at ing, 
because in truth we are always going 
beyond states, prop er ties and predic ates. 
To be posthu man is to become alien in 
many diﬀ er ent ways at the same time. 
Th us, against the accus a tion that the 
posthu man is uneth ical because it fosters 
alien a tion, posthu man theor ists have 
 ALIENATION  
 Alienation is to be rendered alien, or to 
be estranged from some thing. We can be 
alien ated from home (exile), from a ﬁ cti-
tious world (in the theatre, in the arts), 
from ourselves (accord ing to Marx, as 
alien a tion from our product ive force, 
creations and work). Alienation can imply 
depend ence on a power other than 
ourselves; when we become a market able 
commod ity, or when we are manip u lated 
by others through our feel ings and 
aﬀ ections. 
 Alienation is there fore usually a negat-
ive term, imply ing forced loss of proper 
posses sion and estrange ment from who we 
really are, or who we should be. It would 
seem, there fore, that the posthu man is 
open to a negat ive judge ment, for the 
alien a tion it implies in moves away from 
the human. To become posthu man, in alli-
ances with plants, animals, soci et ies, 
mater i als and machines, would also be to 
become alien ated. Th e posthu man might 
then be a place of exploit a tion, exile and 
loss. 
 Two senses of alien a tion begin to point 
to an answer to this criti cism. For Brecht, 
the ‘alien a tion eﬀ ect’ in theatre is a way to 
divest the audi ence of an impli cit accept-
ance of the illu sions of clas sical theatre. In 
this alien a tion, distance is created between 
the audi ence and the action on stage by 
unfa mili ar ity and discom fort. Th is has a 
posit ive goal: the audi ence has to be 
estranged from the stage in order to then 
return to it afresh and more crit ic ally alert 
to its implic a tions. Alienation is a way to a 
greater truth. 
 For Marx, alien a tion is not estrange-
ment from prop erty but from powers, 
from our communal powers to trans form 
our social worlds through joint work. 
We are alien ated when we are enclosed 
and separ ated by modes of produc tion;
ALTERGORITHM 
and polit ic ally, beyond our control. Many, 
includ ing myself, have described this reality 
as the return of History with a capital H, 
but the increas ingly popular Anthropocene 
( Steﬀ en et al. 2007 ) or indeed Capitolocene, 
Jason W. Moore’s ( 2014 ) term for the correl-
a tion between our ecolo gical state and the 
capit al ist condi tion, may be just as appro-
pri ate a label, perhaps even more ﬁ tting. 
Th e second process the alter gorithm is a 
response to is what Ulrich Beck ( 1992 ; see 
also  Giddens 1998 ) has referred to as the 
‘risk society’ and what more recently has 
simply been called ‘algorithmic culture’ 
( Striphas 2015 ): modern culture’s tend ency 
to use algorithms, codes and simu la tions to 
predict and pre- empt the possible outcomes 
of exist ing processes. A pilot in train ing, for 
instance, might use a ﬂ ight simu lator to test 
his abil it ies to respond to all possible scen-
arios; an invest ment banker might develop 
an algorithm to spec u late on the price of a 
stock; an insur ance company calcu lates the 
chance of acci dents, illnesses and deaths; 
and during the ﬁ rst Gulf War, as Jean 
Baudrillard ( 1995 ) argued, the  US army 
premed it ated all of the above, playing out a 
play scrip ted to the comma without the 
consent, and at the cost, of its enemy. What 
the alter gorithm responds to, in other 
words, is the extent to which the ﬁ rst 
process is the anti thesis or, perhaps rather, 
indic ates the failure, of the latter. Th e 
Return of History is that scen ario that 
either wasn’t predicted by algorithms, or, 
more likely, wasn’t what the decoders 
wanted to read. 
 What I mean by alter gorithm is  a map 
of an actual future emer ging from a virtual 
present , as opposed to the algorithm, which 
is used for the mapping of virtual futures 
within the para met ers of an actual present. 
Th e alter gorithm is the name for the prac-
tice, in the arts or else where, that uses the 
algorithm, code or simu la tion to develop 
scen arios that will more likely than not, or 
insisted on the possib il ity of posthu man 
ethics based on ideas of collect ive ecolo-
gies ( MacCormack 2012 : 139). 
 Alienation is hence a useful crit ical 
concept for posthu man thought in three 
ways. First, it allows for a critique of the 
alien a tion forced upon us as multiple 
processes by false ideas of human essences 
and prop er ties. Second, it allows us to track 
the posit ive kinds of alien a tion eﬀ ect 
involved in becom ing posthu man, where 
new assemblages and alli ances increase 
our powers. Th ird, it allows us to pay atten-
tion to the ways we can still fall into the 
negat ive sense of alien a tion as destruct ive, 
when a process of becom ing is taken too 
far or too fast and a line of trans form a tion 
disap pears or loses power, thereby leading 
us to be alien ated from collect ive creat ive 
powers. 
 See 
also 
Rationalist 
Inhumanism; 
Posthuman Ethics; Bodies Politic. 
 James Williams 
 ALTERGORITHM  
 Th e ‘alter gorithm’ takes its name from the 
words ‘altern at ive’, signi fy ing the possib il-
ity of a state of aﬀ airs that is diﬀ er ent from 
the one at hand, and ‘algorithm’, a set of 
autonom ous rules inform ing a compu ta-
tion, oft en used in math em at ics, coding, 
risk assess ment and above all spec u la tion. 1 
Indeed, I use the term to refer to those 
prac tices that envis age altern at ive, oft en 
impossible scen arios through algorithmic 
model ling, 
or, 
rather 
still 
perhaps, 
algorithms that chal lenge natural laws of 
prob ab il ity. 
 Th e trope of the alter gorithm as I see it 
is a reac tion to two over lap ping processes. 
Th e ﬁ rst of these processes is an envir on-
ment that spins, ecolo gic ally, econom ic ally
take place even, or espe cially if it could not; 
the algorithm asks which scen arios will 
take place, is inter ested exclus ively in those 
that can take place. Th e point of the alter-
gorithm, indeed, seems less to predict the 
future, than to think, to extend the possib-
il it ies of the present. As you might expect 
from a digital code, the alter gorithm’s as- 
if state ment oft en spells out an alter or 
non- human present (see Rosi Braidotti’s 
excel lent recent study on Posthumanism, 
published with Polity in 2013, for an incis-
ive consid er a tion of the nature of this 
present). 
 Unsurprisingly, the trope of the alter-
gorithm is partic u larly pervas ive in the 
genre, or sens ib il ity, in art relat ing in one 
way or another – logic, aesthetic, mode of 
produc tion, distri bu tion or consump tion – 
to the inter net and its eﬀ ects on contem por-
ary culture. Indeed, in think ing about the 
alter gorithm, I guess I am think ing above all 
of the projects by artists like, amongst many 
others, Ed Atkins, Katja Novitskova, Ian 
Cheng, Timur Si-Qin, Wu Tsang, Mark 
Leckey, Aleksandra Domanovic, Lawrence 
Abu-Hamdan and Oliver Laric. 3  
 In Ed Atkins’ video perform ances a 
digital avatar modelled aft er the artist 
holds forth mono logues – Atkins’ recor ded 
voice – about the meaning of life. In stark 
contrast to the avatars of role- playing 
games, however, the avatar here is not the 
double enact ing his organic coun ter part’s 
inten ded narrat ive, as much as an inad-
equate place holder for his inco her ent 
subcon scious, lost from its proper locus: 
the human body. Now hybrids, bodies 
without genit als, then disem bod ied, a head 
isol ated in the dark, a head shrink ing, a 
head deﬂ at ing like a hot- air balloon, 
talking from a digital realm with an 
analogue voice, to every one and to no one 
in partic u lar, Atkins’ avatars inter sperse 
incom pre hens ible ramblings with grand 
simply cannot, happen; or that ques tion 
what may and may not happen. It pertains 
to artworks that plot unlikely traject or ies 
from uncer tain and unstable points of 
depar ture. To put it in other words: the 
contem por ary alter gorithm posits an ‘as- if’ 
state ment; the risk society’s algorithm 
poses a ‘what- if’ ques tion. 
 As the early twen ti eth- century reneg-
ade philo sopher German Hans Vaihinger 
( 2009 ) has argued, the conjunc ture ‘as- if’ is 
an analogy – ‘as’ – with a condi tional – ‘if’ 
– a compar ison with an unstable other; it is 
an equa tion in which not only the vari ables 
change, but also the constants. If you treat 
one scen ario  as if it were another, regard-
less of the rela tion one has to the other, you 
open up the terms of the debate. Th e Dutch 
artist Jonas Staal, for instance, by discuss-
ing polit ics as if it were art raises entirely 
new ques tions and altern ate answers. 
Many of these Q’s and A’s will, when trans-
lated back to polit ics, make no sense, but 
some might just help rethink what polit ics 
is and can be.  2 
 Th e risk society’s ‘what- if’ ques tions, in 
contrast, close down. As Shell’s scen ario 
plan ning divi sion explains on their 
website: 
  Shell Scenarios ask ‘what if?’ ques tions to 
explore altern at ive views of the future and 
create plaus ible stories around them. Th ey 
consider long- term trends in econom ics, 
energy supply and demand, geopol it ical 
shift s and social change, as well as the 
motiv at ing factors that drive change. In 
doing so, they help build visions of the 
future. 
 Shell, 2015 
 What- if ques tions, in other words, calcu-
late all possible routes one might take from 
one’s present posi tion. ‘What happens’, they 
ask, ‘when you go left  here, and right there, 
and left , another left , and then right?’ Or: 
‘Where does this road lead?’ Th e trope of
ALTERGORITHM 
models that, ﬁ rst, relate to the possib il ity 
of a world that devel ops diﬀ er ently with, 
or even inde pend ently from human inter-
ac tion; and second, utilize tech no cratic 
models of predic tion to envis age these 
altern at ive scen arios that defy all predic tion. 
Th e point here seems less a plea for a world 
without humans, than a world where 
humans are able to consider options other 
than the ones stem ming from their own 
local ized, embod ied brains, options that 
may well support those humans’ oppor tun-
it ies for survival. In this sense, I guess, the 
alter gorithm in the arts does not have to 
look long for its philo soph ical coun ter-
parts: new mater i al ism, spec u lat ive realism, 
object- oriented onto logy ( OOO ). 
 See also Algorithm; Algorithmic Studies; 
Informatic Opacity; Makehuman; Post 
Internet; Tolerances and Duration.
are simil arly deeply gram mat ic al ized, and 
that makes it partic u larly fascin at ing. Th is 
combin a tion of para- or extra- linguistic 
rich ness along side a deeply gram mat ic al-
ized pres ence suggests there is much to 
explore here, chal lenging the idea of any 
simple border between the linguistic and 
the non- linguistic. 
 First, the linguist ics. consider the 
phrases: the food that we eat. Th e mice that 
cats catch. Th e hikers that rocks crush. In 
this last example, the diﬃ   culty frequently 
exper i enced by English speak ers in 
processing this phrase has much to do with 
the inan im acy of the rock (which plays an 
agent role in rela tion to the verb crush) as 
compared to the animacy of the hikers, 
who in this scen ario play an object role. 
‘Th e hikers that rocks crush’ thus viol ates a 
cross- linguistic animacy pref er ence among 
speak ers. Th ey tend to prefer animate head 
nouns to go with subject- extrac ted relat ive 
clauses (the hikers who __ crushed the 
rock) or inan im ate head nouns to go with 
object- extrac ted relat ive clauses (the rock 
that the hiker crushed __). Add to this that 
there is a smaller plaus ib il ity that rocks will 
agen t ively crush hikers than that hikers 
will agen t ively crush rocks: a concep tual 
order of things, an animate hier archy of 
possible acts, begins to take shape. 
 Even within the case of ‘the hikers that 
rocks crush’, however, it is only within a 
speciﬁ c cosmo logy that stones so obvi-
ously lack agency or could be the source 
of caus al ity; in numer ous indi gen ous 
cultures, includ ing the native Hawaiian 
people, Kanaka Maoli, stones can be taken 
as living beings. But these are deval ued 
accounts 
within 
geopol it ical 
spaces 
domin ated by settler colo ni al ism and 
suppor ted by the hege mony of languages 
such as English. Paralleling this, we also 
ﬁ nd patterns of  de human iz a tion within 
which those in speciﬁ c circum stances of 
 ANIMACIES  
 Animacies raise a twofold issue. On the 
one hand, there are oblig at ory, cross- 
linguistic  gram mat ical  and argu ably also 
 hege mon ic ally encoded oblig a tions to 
register degrees of animacy, that is, levels 
of sentience, mobil ity, person hood or live-
ness. On the other hand, they suggest 
consequences for cultural polit ics and 
theory, partic u larly along the lines of race, 
colo ni al ity, gender and dis/ability. 
 Animacy’s history as a linguistic 
concept is traced to cross- linguistic studies 
of grammar, ﬁ rst noted by the linguistic 
anthro po lo gist Michael Silverstein in  1976 . 
He sugges ted that ‘animacy hier arch ies’ 
were an import ant area of inter sec tion 
between meaning and grammar. Even 
within linguist ics today, animacy most 
gener ally refers to the gram mat ical eﬀ ects 
of the sentience or live ness of noun phrases, 
but this ostens ibly simple meaning opens 
into much wider conver sa tions. 
 In my book on this topic,  Animacies 
(2012), the plur al ity of the title acknow-
ledges that I have built on and expan ded 
beyond the original concep tual appar atus 
of animacy as deﬁ ned in linguist ics. Th ere 
are speciﬁ c approaches one can take while 
explor ing animacies’ cultural polit ics, 
drawing upon a number of oft en segreg-
ated discourses. Each has its set of sens ib il-
it ies – for instance, queer theory gives a 
feeling for the regu la tion of intim acy, and 
crit ical race provides a sense of the subtle 
ways that racial iz a tion can happen. A 
trans dis cip lin ary approach to animacy 
means that for every point of inquiry there 
are many struc tural under stand ings, which 
might be brought to bear, together, upon it. 
 Pluralizing the term is also to recog nize 
that even  within linguist ics schol ar ship, 
animacy remains a myster i ous, mobile 
thing, just beyond one’s reach, and yet 
having a power ful hold on language. It
ANIMACIES 
hier archy is doomed to fail, to have gaps. 
Above all, animacy is polit ical, shaped by 
what or who counts as human, and what or 
who does not. 
 Th e hier arch ical scale posi tions human-
ity in one place and animals in another 
place, despite humans’ resol utely animal 
being, and leaves inan im ate objects in 
several signi ﬁ c ant ways out of the equa tion. 
We could say that govern ments in the 
perpetual race of capit al ism disreg ard 
envir on mental concerns to pursue the 
commod ity, but there is some thing else 
going on in the prior it ies of matter itself 
that makes envir on ment al ism seem unim-
port ant. Ultimately I am arguing that these 
inan im ate objects in the world, despite 
their margin al iz a tion, are exceed ingly 
import ant. Th ey are the doubled matter of 
biopol it ics: the idea of polit ical power or 
govern ment, 
not 
neces sar ily 
through 
govern mental bodies, which takes biolo-
gical life as its point of manage ment and 
control. Th ey further more parti cip ate in 
complex ways in race, gender and sexu al ity 
discourses. Th e busi ness of animacy theory 
is about how the respect ive posi tions and 
inter re la tions between humans, inan im ate 
objects and non- human animals are ostens-
ibly explained in rela tion to one another, 
when they are in fact inter twined in further, 
surpris ing ways. Th ese include the surpris-
ing racial iz a tions and sexu al iz a tions and 
abil it ies/disab il it ies that under run the hier-
archy of animacy. 
 In this analysis words, and genres of 
language, become akin to a ﬁ rst level of 
anim a tion, a primary site in which the 
matter of the world takes shape and is 
aﬀ ect ively informed, in this case for 
humans. Non- human animals take crit ical 
places in both theory and in cultural 
produc tion. And in this analysis we also 
become exposed to the aﬀ ectiv it ies of lead 
and mercury as indus trial pollut ants that 
simul tan eously  aﬀ ect , in the popular sense 
struc tural 
poverty, 
disab il ity, 
racism, 
gender, are considered less fully human 
than others who are in posi tions of 
hierarchal priv ilege. Th is inter pret a tion is 
accur ate insofar as the embel lish ment of 
human ness is only aﬀ orded to some, 
whereas others become, for certain 
circum stances, biopol it ic ally ‘no better 
than’ those in posi tions lower in the 
animate hier archy. How else can we explain 
the utility and potency of ﬁ gur at ive 
resources that, for instance, anim al ize the 
human targets of racism? Th is leads to 
situ ations within domin ant languages 
such as English in which non- human 
animals  and humans stereo typed as 
passive, such as people with cognit ive or 
phys ical disab il it ies, inev it ably are subjec-
ted to the calcu lus of animacy: what 
happens when they are intu it ively judged 
as less animate? What are the full 
consequences of this posi tion? 
 Hence while I consider the animacy 
hier archy as a preval ent concep tual struc-
ture that might come out of under stand ings 
of life li ness, sentience, agency, ability and 
mobil ity in a richly textured world, I actively 
contex tu al ize this hier archy as a polit ic ally 
domin ant one, poten tially aﬀ ected and 
shaped by the spread of Christian cosmo lo-
gies, capit al ism and the colo nial orders of 
things. Animacy’s ‘grammar’ thus extends 
beyond linguistic coer cion to broader 
strokes of biopol it ical governance. I read 
this animacy hier archy, treated by linguists 
as an avowedly concep tual organ iz a tion of 
worldly and abstract things with gram mat-
ical consequence, as a story of  relat ive 
agency. Animacy hier arch ies are precisely 
about which things can or cannot aﬀ ect – or 
be aﬀ ected by – which other things within a 
speciﬁ c 
scheme 
of 
possible 
action. 
Moreover, I study not only this domin ant 
animacy hier archy’s norms, but also its 
leak ages, its ‘ambi val ent gram mat ic al it ies’, to 
map the ways in which such a concep tual
Th ere is there fore a coer cive under pin-
ning to the primacy of English transna-
tion ally (with clear doub ling consequences 
for schol ar ship) that reaches beyond the 
fact that it must be spoken for economic 
advant age, and that under pin ning involves 
a mandate to treat certain aﬀ ects, certain 
agen cies and certain rela tional conﬁ g ur a-
tions as plaus ible, and others as implaus-
ible. Ultimately, animacies are meant to 
explore the kind of possib il ity for justice 
within concep tions of matter in which 
humans play only a part. 
 See also Animal; Animism; In-Human; In/
Human; Posthuman Ethics; Postanimalism. 
 Mel Y. Chen 
 ANIMAL  
 Animals are living beings of various kinds. 
According to the famous Chinese encyc lo-
pae dia, quoted by J. L. Borges, quoted by 
Foucault, 
 animals are divided into: (a) belong ing 
to the emperor, (b) embalmed, (c) tame, 
(d) sucking pigs, (e) sirens, (f) fabulous, 
(g) stray dogs, (h) included in the present 
clas si ﬁ c a tion, (i) fren zied, (j) innu mer-
able, (k) drawn with a very ﬁ ne camel hair 
brush, (1)  et cetera , (m) having just broken 
the water pitcher, (n) that from a long way 
oﬀ  look like ﬂ ies. 
 Foucault 1973 : xv 
 Th is is only one of many possible ways to 
clas sify animals with which we share the 
planet. Th us, Aristotle divides living beings 
into animals that have blood and animals 
that do not. All the animals with blood, 
accord ing to Aristotle, have a spine. In 
Lamarck, animals are divided into verte-
brates and inver teb rates. George Cuvier 
combined the prin ciples of both Lamarck 
of toxins, as well as  eﬀ ect , living bodies. 
Animacy theory allows one to ques tion the 
self- evident relev ance of a word like 
‘toxicity’. 
 In the original study of animacy by 
linguistic anthro po lo gist Michael Silverstein 
that I mentioned above, selec ted indi gen ous 
American and Australian languages, includ-
ing indi gen ous North American Chinookan, 
Australian Dyirbal and other indi gen ous 
Australian languages, were all iden ti ﬁ ed as 
sharing such hier arch ies with Indo-
European 
languages. 
Th at 
indi gen ous 
languages have been at the found a tion of 
linguistic animacy theory, and yet that in 
terms of governance indi gen ous groups 
have been targets of cosmo lo gical viol ence 
under settler colo ni al ism, appears para dox-
ical. But it is worth noting that the fact of 
hier arch ical categor iz a tion can mean a 
variety of diﬀ er ent things. It can mean either 
suprem acy or simply diﬀ er ence, which may 
mean that one can’t equate the animacy 
hier arch ies of some indi gen ous languages 
and cosmo lo gies with some colo nial 
languages. Furthermore, as my book 
 Animacies details, there are some troub ling 
patterns in the linguistic research that 
default to a kind of dehis tor icized account of 
animacy, which neut ral izes the polit ics of 
the patterns we observe. Indeed colo nial 
prac tices oft en use indi gen ous forms of 
trans- animate 
co- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
against 
them selves (as in, their prim it iv isms have 
not advanced to a proper under stand ing 
 of justi ﬁ ed human – that is to say, white – 
suprem acy). Within schol ar ship there are 
tensions worth sitting with and explor ing, 
not only to take in the radical viol ence of the 
ongoing occu pa tion of indi gen ous and 
other spaces in ways that do and do not 
mimic the more limited set of rela tions 
under European colon iz a tion, but also to ask 
in what ways schol ar ship habitu ally ignores 
or consumes indi gen ous know ledges and 
what are the ethical rami ﬁ c a tions.
ANIMAL 
category. Th is is called human excep tion. 
However, in fact humans are, of course, 
animals, too, as they are born, breathe, 
move, eat other living things, repro duce 
and even tu ally die. Angels, even though 
they do not die, can also be regarded as 
animals, since they possess wings, claws, 
talons and tails; everything which has 
a tail must be qual i ﬁ ed as animal, aero-
planes, comets and rockets included, in 
spite of the fact that human beings usually 
separ ate celes tial bodies and machines 
with tails from other beasts. Finally, gods 
are animals. At least, they were. At the 
cradle of human ity, our ﬁ rst gods were 
animals. 
 Prehistoric people believed in the divine 
nature of animals they saw around, and 
used to draw them on the walls and ceil-
ings of their caves. Th ese paint ings were 
icons of prehis toric men. Lizards, snakes, 
elephants, lions, eagles, giraﬀ es and other 
great things that they met did not work and 
did not speak languages, there fore they 
were considered higher than men. Th ey 
were, and they still are, as Georges Bataille 
puts it, sover eign, or ‘essen tially free beings’ 
( Bataille 1986 ). However, the atti tude 
towards animals in ancient totem ism was 
extremely ambigu ous. Animals were fore-
fath ers and gods, but at the same time 
provided people with everything they 
needed for life – food, habit a tion, clothes, 
tools and arms. Th eir ﬂ esh, their skins, 
bones, horns – everything was of use. 
For this, people were killing animals, 
but if these animals were their gods, great 
ancest ors or other divine entit ies, such 
killings were called sacri ﬁ ces. Sometimes 
sacri ﬁ ced animals were invited to the feast 
where their own ﬂ esh was served and 
where all members of a given community 
– say tribe – were prais ing them while 
eating them. 
and Aristotle: in his theory, verteb rates 
have red blood, and inver teb rates have 
white. 
Generally 
speak ing, 
Lamarck 
thinks the same way, but he deﬁ nes blood 
through the intens ity of its red colour. 
Th erefore, accord ing to him, inver teb rates 
do not have true blood, which is red, 
and so on. Hegel, in his turn, bases further 
clas si ﬁ c a tion of verteb rates on the elements 
to which animal bodies are adapted – that 
is, earth, air or water – and thus we have 
land animals, birds and ﬁ sh ( Hegel 2007 : 
425). One could also divide animals into 
human, non- human, pre- human and 
posthu man. 
 An almost inﬁ n ite variety of today’s 
animals emerged as a result of the so- called 
Cambrian explo sion and the Skeleton 
revolu tion, which happened around 500 
million years ago. Th is revolu tion gave 
to animals not only exoskel et ons, but 
complex organs, eyes and even brains. 
Before that, animals existed, too, but they 
were abso lutely diﬀ er ent. Some of them 
resembled inﬂ at able mattresses; others 
were rather like discs, tubes or mud- ﬁ lled 
bags. Th ese organ isms, called Ediacaran 
biota, which are now completely extinct, 
were mostly sessile, perman ently attached 
to their places. In contrast to them, perhaps 
the main thing which all contem por ary 
animals have in common is their motil ity, 
although there are animals that still prefer 
to rest. 
 Traditionally animals are diﬀ er en ti ated 
from plants, mush rooms, bacteria and stuﬀ  
like this, on the one hand, and human 
beings, angels, machines and gods, on the 
other. Th ese divi sions, made by science, 
are, of course, very conven tional. In a way, 
every living thing has some thing animal in 
it, at least if we pay closer atten tion to the 
etymo logy, which shows that the word 
‘animal’ derives from  anima , a Latin term 
for the soul and the anim at ing prin ciple of 
life. Human beings oft en exclude them-
ANIMISM (LIMULUS)
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
emphas ized by John Berger, who, in his 
essay  Why Look at Animals? claims that 
this process is simul tan eous with the 
appear ance of zoos: ‘Public zoos came into 
exist ence at the begin ning of the period 
which was to see the disap pear ance of 
animals from daily life’ ( Berger 2009 : 30). 
According to Berger, ‘Th e historic loss, to 
which zoos are the monu ment, is now 
irre deem able for the culture of capit al ism’ 
(ibid. 37). More and more animals depart, 
one by one, leaving human ity with pets 
and toys. To these strik ing obser va tions, 
Akira Mizuta Lippit adds that in fact they 
‘never  entirely  vanish, but rather continue 
to exist in a state of  perpetual vanish ing ’. 
Th eir exist ence become  spec tral , or, ‘In 
super nat ural 
terms, 
modern ity 
ﬁ nds 
animals linger ing in the world  undead ’ 
( Lippit 2000 : 1). 
 When the last animal disap pears, the 
sun will die out and never rise again. 
 See also  Ahuman; Animacies; Animism; 
Animism (Limulus); Bios; Postanimalism; 
Urbanibalism. 
 Oxana Timofeeva 
 ANIMISM (LIMULUS)  
 Limulus  is a ﬁ lm. Th e narrator is a super-
nat ural piece of marine debris. 
 See also Animism; Non-Human Agency; 
Biological Arts/Living Arts; Hypersea; 
Multispecies. 
 Karen Kramer 
 Human atti tude with regard to animals 
remained para dox ical through out the 
whole of history. With the rise of other, 
more recent forms of reli gion, espe cially 
Christianity, animals lost their divine 
status, but animal sacri ﬁ ces remained. 
Of mono the isms, for instance, Islam still 
keeps the tradi tion of a massive animal 
sacri ﬁ ce, with lambs oﬀ ered to God, 
whereas Christianity tends to be a kind 
of post- sacri ﬁ  cial reli gion: the death of 
Christ on the Cross symbol izes the last 
sacri ﬁ ce from which Christian history 
starts. Animals never the less keep pro-
viding men with all the stuﬀ  needed 
for human life – ﬂ esh, skins, bones, etc. 
As Michel Serres
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ANIMISM (LIMULUS)
ANIMISM (LIMULUS)
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 Stills from Karen Kramer,  Limulus ,  2013 , fi lm.
ANIMISM 
century, with its concerns over media, 
mater i al ity and the valid ity of non-
European know ledge. 
 Drawing on clas sical philo sophy and 
a then- viru lent debate on vital ism and 
spir it ism, it was Edward B. Tylor (who held 
the ﬁ rst univer sity chair in anthro po logy) 
who gave the term its collo quial meaning 
in his major work  Primitive Culture (1871), 
signi fy ing a ‘belief in spirits’ that for Tylor 
was the univer sal origin of reli gion. Th e 
term carried the alleg a tion that so- called 
prim it ive cultures were incap able of assess-
ing the mater ial world. 
 Tylor claimed that every reli gion 
stemmed from the attri bu tion of life, soul 
or spirit to inan im ate objects. According 
to this theory, Europeans have advanced 
from animism, via poly the ism, to mono-
the ism, and from there to the highest stage 
of science, rising from a state of nature to 
one of civil iz a tion. In contrast, indi gen ous 
peoples of North and South America, 
Africa, Asia and Polynesia were left  behind 
during this evol u tion ary process and 
remain as the savage surviv als of a natural 
state. But while Tylor legit im ized the colo-
nial agenda both expli citly and impli citly, 
he also was among those European writers 
who insisted early on about the mental 
unity of all mankind – a fact that was of 
great signi ﬁ c ance in a climate of scientiﬁ c 
racism that oft en expli citly denied non-
Europeans ration al ity or even human ity. 
Despite its enorm ous inﬂ u ence in cultural 
theory from psycho logy to art, Tylor’s 
animism was long shunned through out the 
twen ti eth century due to its all too expli cit 
evol u tion ism and its invest ment in what 
Claude Lévi-Strauss termed the ‘archaic 
illu sion’ – the fallacy char ac ter istic of 
modern prim it iv ism that blended chil dren, 
savages and the insane and declared them 
to be surviv als of an archaic past. In the late 
 ANIMISM  
 ‘Animism’ desig nates a cosmos in which 
theor et ic ally everything is alive and 
commu nic at ing, and poten tially possesses 
the qual it ies of being ‘a person’ or, at the 
very least, an agent of some kind. It 
describes a world in which all social and 
onto lo gical bound ar ies are porous and can 
be crossed under speciﬁ c circum stances, a 
world of becom ings and meta morph oses, 
in which no entity precedes the sets of 
rela tions that bring it into being. 
 From the perspect ive of state order, 
insofar as the latter relies on stable iden tit-
ies, all kinds of anim isms pose a poten tial 
threat. Th e discourse about ‘savage’ 
animism is hence above all a ques tion of 
what is permit ted into the social collect ive, 
with full status and rights, and what gains 
only minor or subjug ated status or is 
completely excluded. Th e border of separ-
a tion between the fully ‘human’ and its 
others – the prim it ive, the savage, the 
animal, the insane – is not simply a given, 
but a cultural construc tion  and evol u tion-
ary product at the same time, with some 
distinc tions argu ably less mutable then 
others – for the border between a plant and 
a human to be crossed, an entire cosmo-
logy and its order of the elements would 
need to be upset. 
 Colonial Implications 
 Animism, derived from the Latin  anima , 
inex tric ably links ques tions of commu nic-
ab il ity and media with long- embattled 
ques tions over the soul and its rela tion to 
mater i al ity. Is the soul an enclosed prop erty 
of human beings alone or a realm of 
medi al ity, the condi tion of possib il ity to 
be- in-a- medium-of- commu nic a tion? 
Inheriting earlier theo lo gical discourses 
trans posed into secular and novel scientiﬁ c 
vocab u lar ies, the concept came to be a
their others, as the minimum demand put 
forth by the concept is that at least these 
borders and their under ly ing categor ies 
can poten tially be re- thought. Th e char ac-
ter of the concept as a real concep tual and 
imagin ary limit is under lined by the fact 
that for the major ity of European authors 
writing on animism, just like Tylor, the 
‘spirits’ of others actu ally remain enig matic 
and inac cess ible. ‘Spirits’ appear to categor-
ic ally escape the objec ti ﬁ c a tion methods 
of Western epistem o logy. Within their 
respect ive systems of know ledge and 
discip lines, most authors are incap able of 
acknow ledging their onto lo gical status as 
‘real’, and hence trans pose them into other 
onto lo gical desig na tions – as phenom ena 
of psycho logy or even art. 
 To talk of animism today still means to 
approach the limits of the matrix of Western 
thought. With this concept, modern ity 
sought to diﬀ er en ti ate itself from its other 
with a gesture of inclus ive exclu sion, assign-
ing such other ness a place within its own 
matrix. Th e other ness of animism is simul-
tan eously a horizon that circum scribes and 
encircles modern ity and its civil iz a tional 
discourse, from both the past and the future. 
From the past, because the animism 
described by the ethno lo gists and psycho lo-
gists of the late nine teenth century as the 
prim or dial ground of ‘reli gion’ (cf.  Hörl 2005 ; 
 Schüttpelz 1872 ;  Schott 2015 ) is that which 
modern civil iz a tion must suppress and leave 
behind in order to become civil ized and 
modern. But animism also appears at the 
other end of the vector of time – as a future 
condi tion in which alien a tion and the great 
divides of modern ity are imagined as over-
come. A politi cized discourse on animism 
hence may ask not about the subjectiv ity of 
percep tion, but about the subjectiv ity of the 
so- called object. It is not only the histori-
ography of slavery and colo ni al ism that 
demands that the ques tion of animism be 
approached inside out, as it were.  
nine teenth and early twen ti eth centur ies 
‘animism’ was frequently invoked in the 
European struggle to account for the onto-
lo gical enigma of the mode of commu nic-
a tion in so- called prim it ive soci et ies, as 
well as medi umistic phenom ena inside 
Western soci et ies and the rise of tech no lo-
gical media. Th e discourse of animism 
hence consti tuted a ‘media- tech no lo gical 
phant asm’ (see  Hörl 2015 ) situ ated onto lo-
gic ally in the abyss between the dicho tom-
ies opened up by (Cartesian) poles of 
matter and mind, subject and object, 
humans and nature. It is equally invoked 
with great frequency whenever the concep-
tual certain ties related to these poles and 
their mode of repres ent a tion are frac tured, 
desig nat ing a liminal zone in the encounter 
with alter ity and onto lo gical diﬀ er ence. 
Th roughout its history, the term stands 
for the attempt to ﬁ xate contra dict ory 
moments of concep tual bewil der ment, 
from the promise of trans form ab il ity and 
unboun ded intel li gib il ity across onto lo-
gical divides, to the exper i ence of these 
divides as unbridge able and untrans lat able. 
 Contemporary Uses 
 In recent years, the concept has been 
revived in debates that crit ic ally mirror 
and ques tion the onto lo gical parti tions 
and assump tions of modern ity and its 
stand ard meta phys ics. Th e new under-
stand ings of animism are not based on the 
funda ment of iden tity and being, but 
rather on becom ings, echoing an altern at-
ive strand of Western philo sophy. 1 Th is 
resur gence of animism as ‘rela tional onto-
logy’ is perhaps symp to matic of a wider 
crisis of Western object iv ism under a new 
inform a tion paradigm (see  Hörl 2015 ). 
 Th e contin ued chal lenge of the concept 
of animism lies in the imper at ive to re- 
think the border between humans and
ANONYMITY 
the horizon of de- objec ti ﬁ c a tion, the 
horizon of a rela tional subject within the 
ﬁ eld of an expan ded medi al ity. Th e animism 
of capital is a resource which grants the 
neolib eral subject access to (self)trans form-
ab il ity and perhaps even more import antly, 
follow ing the imper at ive of ﬂ ex ib il ity and 
ecolo gical beha viour, with the means to 
adapt. In a certain sense, the mech an isms 
described by Freud, accord ing to which the 
animist projects his conscious ness into the 
world, are becom ing increas ingly real ized 
in the algorithmi cized world of digital 
 tracing and  track ing , at least to the extent 
that the diﬀ er ence between conscious ness 
and world is annulled when we inhabit the 
feed back loops, continu ally encoun ter ing 
the pref er ences and projec tions of our own 
digital proﬁ les. 
 See also Animism (Limulus); Anthrōpos; 
Non- human 
Agency; 
Anthropism/
Immanent Humanism. 
 Note 
 1. 
See, for example, Viveiros de Castro 
( 2004 ), Bird-David ( 1999 ), Descola ( 1992 ) 
and Holbraad and Willerslev ( 2007 ).  
 Anselm Franke 
 ANONYMITY  
 ‘I mourn the loss of my anonym ity every 
day.’ 
 Writing from prison to support ers, an 
anarch ist activ ist who is inside for placing 
a home- made ‘stinger’, a plank with an 
array of upturned nails, outside the car exit 
of a police station in Bristol one night, 
grieves for her change in status from an 
unname able force to that of a known 
quant ity ( Shepherd 2015 ). Th is loss of 
anonym ity, of turning a pluri po tent person 
 Animism and Capitalism 
 During the further course of the twen ti eth 
century animism ceased to func tion as 
modern ity’s excluded counter- image. In 
the middle of the twen ti eth century Claude 
Lévi-Strauss declared the ‘archaic illu sion’ 
to be over ( Lévi-Strauss 1949 ), and this 
end was asso ci ated with the dissol u tion of 
substance- based think ing and its dual istic 
oppos i tions of man and nature, body and 
soul, even life and non- life. On the basis of 
inform a tion tech no lo gies, cyber net ics and 
system theor ies, the former oppos i tions 
became increas ingly obsol ete. Th e entire 
second half of the twen ti eth century bears 
witness to an onto lo gical trans form a tion, in 
which the categor ies, the repres ent a tional, 
substan tial and tran scend ental thought of 
Western modern ity are gradu ally replaced 
by the paradigm of commu nic a tion, cul-
min at ing in a rela tional refor mu la tion of 
reality. 
 To this day we still occupy the frame work 
of this new discourse: the previ ously 
excluded (banished to the abyss of the 
‘archaic’) middle now shift s to the centre: 
‘Everything takes place in the centre’, through 
‘medi ation, 
trans la tion 
and 
networks’ 
( Latour 1993 : 76). In the world of distrib uted 
conscious ness, with the power of agency 
allot ted to human and non- human prot ag-
on ists, it is no longer the shaping of the 
world of objects through human labour that 
consti tutes the core of produc tion, but the 
modu la tion of milieus, and within them, the 
‘transin di vidual’ dimen sion of the produc-
tion of subjectiv ity (cf.  Aspe 2013 ). Th e 
‘return’ of animism to the centre of modern-
ity essen tially proves to be a result of compu-
ter iz a tion and the exper i ence of medial 
envir on ments and their feed back loops. 
 Th e horizon of neolib eral ideo lo gical 
mobil isa tion is, as Achille Mbembe recently 
proposed, an iden tity of capital and 
animism ( Mbembe 2015 : 17). It delin eates
writhe together without name or oblig a tion, 
though vari ably riddled with the systems of 
nomen clature given in the anthropic toolkit. 
Becoming the agent of history, rather than 
of the mere passage of time, in such a 
context meant moving back wards and 
forwards across the bound ary of name less-
ness at diﬀ er ent times and in diﬀ er ent ways, 
giving words to a process, utter ing new 
words, some times attach ing them to some-
thing that became a subject. 
 Th e ques tion of alien a tion, in which the 
human became strange to itself, through 
work, oblig a tion, custom, and indeed experi-
ment, some times as a release, some times as 
anguish is core to this era, but it was also the 
era in which anonym ity to oneself, as Eduard 
Glissant writes in terms of opacity, becomes 
paradig matic of the ques tion of being a self 
( Glissant 1997 ). Knowledge and anonym ity 
are not mutu ally exclus ive, but inter twined. 
For Foucault, these two tend en cies were 
nego ti ated by the ‘anonym ous murmur’ 
( Foucault [1973] 1994 ) of discourse in 
which the ideas of the time were developed 
not in the decidedly named oper a tions of 
the world of philo sophy, but in the complexes 
of ideas and oper a tions that formed ways of 
knowing and doing in medi cine, and the 
human and natural sciences more broadly. 
Probing the unspoken and expli cit terms 
of this process, from the formu la tions of 
discip lines to the circu la tion of tech niques 
provides in turn an initial means of recog-
niz ing the way in which tech no lo gies take 
part in the shaping and induc tion of know-
ledge. In such a condi tion for Foucault, a 
problem was to ﬁ nd a means of erasing one’s 
name, of gaining the succour of disap pear-
ance behind the cloak of anonym ity 
( Foucault 1996 ). 
 Such a posi tion, within this tension 
between anonym ity and the mech an isms 
of know ledge, forms the grounds for much 
of the way in which modes of anonym ity 
are formed in contem por ary polit ics, with 
into some thing with a record, a name, 
address and date of birth, with biomet ric 
meas ure ments, known asso ci ates and aﬃ  l-
i ations is a point of anguish. Anonymity 
for her is a space of freedom, a chance to 
move in the city without being logged, 
without being anti cip ated, without bring-
ing the plague to others who might lose 
their anonym ity by becom ing persons of 
interest to the police by observ able contact 
with her. Th e loss of anonym ity in this case 
is tragedy, losing itself to iden ti ﬁ  ab il ity as a 
force that negates anonym ity, shapes and 
disem bowels its constitu ent capa cit ies and 
its spaces of feeling and action. 
 Anonymity has its struc tural condi tions 
and its histor ies, its contours chan ging over 
time in rela tion to the tech niques of the 
state, of science and of media. Anonymity, 
more broadly, is not only the welcome dark 
cloak of the revolu tion ary, but also the 
space in which much of life takes place and 
which, histor ic ally speak ing, it has unfol-
ded. Anonymity is the space of evol u tion 
and the coming into being of life amidst 
the inter ac tions of millions of unnamed 
entit ies. Th e way in which diﬀ er ent histor-
ical moments artic u late the tension 
between processes of naming, describ ing 
and knowing, and anonym ity as a primal 
condi tion consti tutes a submerged strata of 
the condi tion of know ledge. 
 Th e liter at ure of the nine teenth century 
made a virtue and a problem of the city as 
the engine and the theatre of anonym ity. 
Th e night and the prox im ity of thou sands 
of unknown persons became the space in 
which ﬁ gures such as the ‘masses’ could be 
conceived. Th e enorm ity of human force 
driving industry, ﬁ lling slums, devour ing 
resources, repro du cing and doing unname-
able things in anonym ous rooms is a staple, 
and imagined as a space of freedom, of 
fascin a tion and of disgust. Here history 
becomes an immense black chamber at the 
back of a pub, a space in which bodies
ANONYMITY 
may also invert and become a deﬁ n ing 
contour of a literal concrete border wall. 
 Alongside this condi tion is that of the 
rela tion between privacy and anonym ity in 
digital media. Whereas anonym ity is to not 
yet become named or to exist outside of 
the condi tion of the regis tra tion of names, 
privacy is to main tain iden tity as a 
resource; to parcel it out, to operate with it 
as it has already entered the economy of 
iden ti ﬁ c a tion but held in reserve as an 
asset within possess ive indi vidu al ism. Th e 
large- scale plat forms that aim at produ-
cing and enfor cing global mono pol ies in 
partic u lar vari et ies of digital inform a tion 
services have the erasure of anonym ity as a 
core busi ness aim. Subsequently, what 
passes for privacy is also eroded by them. 
Part of this condi tion is what makes for 
new polit ical move ments: those that 
embrace privacy as a form of human right; 
and those that engender anonym ity as a 
form of conﬂ ict and refusal. Anonymity as 
a condi tion, in the ﬁ gure of the multiple- 
name ‘Anonymous’ used by hackers, is also 
a declar a tion of solid ar ity in this condi-
tion, a ﬁ gure of the unknown as one of 
gener os ity ( Coleman 2014 ). Here, those 
iden ti ﬁ ed and isol ated from this current 
have oft en shown them selves to have an 
astute polit ical analysis of the present day. 
 One partic u lar episode is perhaps 
symp to matic of the inter con nec ted fault 
lines of this condi tion. In 2012, people 
using the Anonymous name leaked the 
email log of the consultancy group Stratfor 
via WikiLeaks. Stratfor’s work involves 
trading in polit ical and economic infor m-
ation, oft en against polit ical activ ists 
and human rights move ments, espe cially 
those that may have some consequence for 
the contin ued proﬁ t ab il ity of resource- 
extrac tion based indus tries. Th e inform a-
tion that led to the public release of this 
data came from a hacker called Sabu, 
an  FBI -suppor ted agent provocateur. Th e 
the speciﬁ c condi tion also that such polit-
ics is also partially prepared and embed-
ded in tech no lo gical forms. One can say 
that there are broadly two tend en cies here, 
neither of which is immune from the 
other: the discourse of human rights and 
the related though partially contra dict ory 
one of the tension between anonym ity and 
privacy in compu ta tional and networked 
digital media. 
 In the contem por ary era, human rights 
has been formu lated as against the 
anonym iz ing func tions of cells, torture, 
mass graves and labour camps, which 
them selves used mech an isms of iden ti ﬁ c a-
tion and enumer a tion aimed at erasing the 
singu lar ity of a person ( Wachsmann 2015 ). 
Human rights discourse consists of identi-
fy ing and raising to a level of atten tion 
those who are eﬀ aced and dismembered. It 
extols and defends people without the 
papers that name, those without access to 
anything but anonym ity. It makes public 
the means of erasure and provides a means 
of reverse- engin eer ing such processes to 
name their mech an isms and their oper a-
tors ( Forensic Architecture 2014 ). In doing 
so it must nego ti ate the diﬃ   culty of pro-
posing a univer sal ized version of human ity 
that acts not as a condi tion of solid ar ity but 
as an agent of diﬀ er en ti ation of what falls 
above and below such a stand ard and that 
can thus, once codi ﬁ ed and turned into a 
legal oper ator in itself, be manip u lated in 
turn against the condi tions that it aimed at 
defend ing. Such, for instance, is the condi-
tion in Gaza where, as Eyal Weizman 
describes it, the legal defences of human 
rights are used by Israeli milit ary lawyers 
as a means to describe, and thus tighten, 
the inside of a tour ni quet ( Weizman 2012 ). 
Human rights thus becomes a para dox ical 
yet univer sal found a tion that is at once 
both a Möbius strip, turning itself inside 
out in grot esque convo lu tions, but also 
essen tial, a barrier and a barri cade, that
ANTHROPISM/IMMANENT HUMANISM
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
there any premises that can be retained 
from a concept that seems to have been 
evac u ated of all its prom ises, having 
traversed the space from project to an ideo-
logy that has suppor ted both the most 
horriﬁ c and the most sublime acts by 
human beings? Humanism is a notori ously 
slip pery concept that, as Vito Giustiniani 
( 1985 ) points out, shift s mean ings from 
language to language even within the same 
linguistic family (from German to French), 
linguistic tradi tions (from contin ental 
Europe to Britain) and polit ical gene a lo gies 
(from Greek to Latin). Humanism writ 
large is of course, an anthro po centric 
praxis, a praxis that centres the world on 
the human being as the human in its 
Renaissance 
iter a tion, 
sourced 
from 
 humanus , who is always already a being 
predic ated upon that which it excludes, be 
that woman, Black, First Nation, dark- and-
darker, African, indi gen ous, resting on the 
tran scend ence of its own meaning. It is a 
concept and a praxis that was vacated in the 
Querelle des Anciens et des Modernes, 
where the clas sical content of human ism 
was replaced by the turn to science and 
tech no logy. As Giustiniani
ANTHROPOCENE OBSERVATORY 
now in Aimeé Césaire, now in the utter-
ances of Malcolm X, of the inmates at 
Attica, of the Palestinians in Gaza, on signs 
held by the refugees and immig rants 
on the Greek border with Macedonia 
plead ing for safe passage to a safe place. 
 I train my gaze, then, to a new iter a tion 
of human ism, an imman ent, secular, 
demo cratic and anthro po lo gical human-
ism that will further trouble and upset the 
ﬁ eld, that will unsettle the archive, a 
human ism centred on human ity, one that 
neither falls back to the anthro po centrism 
of the Enlightenment nor reima gines the 
human as the aleat ory exper i ence of itself, 
a human that places the  mécon nais sance of 
itself, the mis- recog ni tion of the subject by 
the subject at the centre of a new polit ical 
project of a prom ised autonomy. An 
imman ent human ism that listens to how 
humans deﬁ ne them selves, a human ism 
that is an  anthrop ism , so that it skirts the 
exclu sion ary mech an isms of the past and 
re- proposes the ánthro pos of the now, 
outside of any tran scend ence, enga ging 
with no meta phys ics. 
 See 
also 
Anthrōpos; 
Anthropocene; 
Critical Posthumanism; Posthumanism; 
Posthuman Critical Th eory. 
 Neni Panourgiá 
 ANTHROPOCENE OBSERVATORY  
 A new intens i ﬁ c a tion is reshap ing the 
surface of the planet: human changes to the 
Earth’s climate, land, oceans and biosphere 
are now so great and so rapid that the thesis 
of a new geolo gical epoch deﬁ ned by the 
actions of humans – the Anthropocene – is 
now being widely debated and artic u lated. 
Th is thesis is devel op ing across a number 
of circuits, insti tu tions, organ iz a tions, 
scientiﬁ c and intel lec tual ﬁ elds, all of which 
colo ni al ists and their local proxies ( Césaire 
1972 ;  de Gennaro 2003 ;  Wilder 2005 ; 
 Cooper 2006 ). 
 Th e German neoclas sical move ment 
in archi tec ture of the late eight eenth and 
early nine teenth centur ies (itself the result 
of the hellen omania of the Germans for 
Ancient Greece) that looked at ancient 
Greek rather than Roman art chal lenged 
the Latin- based human ism of the time and 
intro duced German  neuhu man is mus that 
priv ileged Greek thought (and demo cracy) 
over Latin thought (and  res publica ). Until 
Hitler showed up. 
 In the space between the human it arian 
bene vol ence of  human is mus (what Césaire 
called in his  Notebook 53 ‘bene fact ors 
of human ity’) and the ration al ity and sub-
lim ity of  neuhu man is mus  stepped Edward 
Said ( 2004 ) to draw a distinc tion between 
Heidegger’s human ism as the logos of the 
meta phys ical rela tion ship of human ism to 
a prior Being, and what Said meant by 
human ism, a term that he imbued with the 
exper i ence of exile, extra ter rit ori al ity and 
home less ness. Keeping in mind the abuses 
that human ism suﬀ ered in its iter a tions as 
Eurocentrism, Said called for a diﬀ er ent 
kind of human ism, ‘human ism as a usable 
praxis of intel lec tu als and academ ics who 
want to know what they are doing, what 
they are commit ted to as schol ars, and who 
want also to connect these prin ciples to 
the world in which they live as citizens’ 
(2004: 6). Said saw human ism as the ‘process 
of unend ing disclos ure . . . self- criti cism, 
and liber a tion . . . as critique that is demo-
cratic, secular and open . . . and that its 
purpose is to make things avail able to 
crit ical scru tiny as the product of human 
labor’ (21–2), a human ism that, with a nod 
to Isaac Deutscher’s ‘non-Jewish Jew’ would 
engage the ‘non- human ist human ist’ (77). 
Th is is a human ism that rests on the under-
stand ing – no, demands the recog ni tion – 
of a shared human ity, now in Franz Fanon,
these prac tices in a series of short ﬁ lms, 
inter views and docu ment ary mater i als: the 
aim of the project is to illus trate in detail the 
unfold ing of the thesis of the Anthropocene 
in its many streams of inﬂ u ence.  
 Territories 
 Th e Anthropocene is the new geolo gical 
epoch where the world- system domin ates 
and impacts the earth system at new and 
unpre ced en ted scales and intens it ies. It 
sets in motion a series of rever ber a tions 
and oscil la tions that scatter long- estab-
lished bound ar ies and it opens up a new 
set of divi sions of time and space. 
Territories are the speciﬁ c forms of the 
links between the earth and humans, 
between the earth system and the many 
world- systems that humans shape. 
 Territories are the sustained form of the 
rela tion ship between human cohab it a tion 
are equally aﬀ ected by this unfold ing 
discourse, as much as the envir on ments in 
which they act. 
 Operating as an obser vat ory, a com pos-
i tion of docu ment ary prac tices and 
discourses, this project traces the form a-
tion of the Anthropocene thesis. Th e 
project combines ﬁ lm, photo graphy, docu-
ment a tion, inter views, spatial analysis and 
ﬁ eld work to form an archive and a series 
of install a tions, seminars, debates and 
cultural inter ven tions. 
 Across a number of speciﬁ c inter na-
tional agen cies and organ iz a tions, inform a-
tion about scientiﬁ c research is acquired, 
registered, eval u ated, processed, stored, 
archived, organ ized and re- distrib uted. 
Th ese behind- the-scenes processes and 
prac tices, that lead to the equally complex 
decision- making proced ures, form new 
discourses and ﬁ gures of shift . Th e 
Anthropocene Observatory docu ments 
 United Nations COP19 Climate Change Conference. Warsaw, Poland, 2013.  
 GIULIA BRUNO AND ARMIN LINKE
ANTHROPOCENE OBSERVATORY 
humans, and between us and natural 
resources, processes and forms. 
 Th e rise, devel op ment, artic u la tion and 
organ iz a tion of territ or ies divide time 
and estab lish bound ar ies and borders in 
space. Th ese divi sions are as dynamic as 
their coun ter parts. Th e rise of new terri-
tor ies cuts across estab lished rela tions; 
in their wake new artic u la tions are formed, 
and previ ous ones disrup ted and severed. 
Th e concep tu al iz a tion of these moments 
of trans ition, the rela tions to the mater ial 
traces and the human histor ies of these 
trans form a tions, is what guides and forms 
aspir a tions of know ledge, governance and 
inﬂ u ence over human spaces and earth 
processes. Th e Anthropocene is reshap ing 
these aspir a tions, real loc at ing and redis-
trib ut ing agen cies, estab lish ing new power 
rela tions and new links between atmo-
spheric chem istry and human polit ical 
action, between ocean circu la tions and 
infra struc tures, between sedi ment a tion 
pro cesses and engin eer ing, between energy 
and mater ial processes, unfold ing in time 
and across space. Th ey are a construc tion 
devel op ing over time, and they mould the 
struc tures of both envir on mental processes 
and the speciﬁ c forms of human polit ies. 
Th e bound ar ies of the social, economic, 
legal, polit ical and cultural spaces that 
territ or ies shape, their rules of legit im a-
tion, inclu sion and exclu sion, their 
members, their hier arch ies, their cohe sion 
over time and space, are reﬂ ec ted and 
marked into the forms of terrains, river 
basins, shorelines, ﬁ elds, the modes of 
organ iz a tion of work on the land, the 
shape of settle ments and the framing of 
circu la tions. 
 Territories evolve in time and in space, 
they are a dynamic system, shaped by a 
vast array of indi vidual inter ac tions, local 
contin gen cies and speciﬁ c sets of agents. 
Th e partic u lar forms of those inter ac tions, 
and their relat ive stabil ity over time, shape 
vast systems of coher ence and power; they 
estab lish the forms of the rela tion between 
 Mesopotamia: territ orial trans form a tions at the age of global war. Multiyear satel lite multis pec tral 
analysis, normal ized differ ence veget a tion index.          © TERRITORIAL AGENCY
space and over time, with clear bound ar ies 
and dura tions of its internal and external 
rela tions. Earth System sciences set out to 
under stand the complex inter re la tions that 
char ac ter ize the Earth as a whole. Th ey 
integ rate a variety of discip lines and ﬁ elds 
of know ledge produc tion. 
 Th e devel op ment of Earth System 
sciences has shown that the Earth oper ates 
as a complex single system, with phys ical, 
chem ical, biolo gical and human com-
ponents, each one inter act ing with all the 
others. Th ey contrib ute to shape a system 
that is self- regu lat ing and presents multi- 
scale temporal and spatial coher ences. Th e 
dynam ics of the rela tions that char ac ter ize 
the Earth System are unique and they 
are domin ated by life. Th e condi tions to 
main tain life are the result of complex self- 
organ iz ing rela tions between the compon-
ents of the Earth System. Th e inter ac tion 
and natural resources extrac tion and the 
forms of glob al ized economy and war. 
 A series of Anthropocene tipping 
points, of rapid trans itions away from the 
long- estab lished forms of modern world- 
systems and from the territ or ies of the 
Holocene, are depic ted here. Th ey char ac-
ter ize how the concept of the Anthropocene 
is reson at ing across human spaces, cutting 
through notions of govern ment and plan-
ning, survey and manage ment of resources, 
modi fy ing scientiﬁ c prac tices and their 
rela tion to human it ies, setting in spin 
forms of cohab it a tion. A dark, new space is 
opening up, where only small glimpses of 
new territ orial struc tures taking form are 
visible. 
 Earth System 
 In a system, diﬀ er ent elements or com-
ponents inter act and are inter de pend ent, 
 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 99.9 per cent air- based substance. Pasadena, USA 
1999.   ARMIN LINKE
ANTHROPOCENE OBSERVATORY 
as much as local contin gen cies and imme-
di ate actions have. 
 Th e inter twined rela tion between the 
history of nations and the history of the 
Earth has been at the centre of many diﬀ er-
ent concep tu al iz a tions and civil iz a tions 
over time. Th e devel op ment of these 
concepts, their speciﬁ c history, their form-
al iz a tion, struc tur ing and diﬀ u sion are 
equally a key element in the form a tion of 
world- systems. 
 World- systems are a coher ent, sweep ing 
force, unfold ing across large areas and 
through economic, social, polit ical and 
cultural struc tures and inter ac tions. Th ey 
operate at very high levels of coher ence and 
unfold at scales well beyond the indi vidual 
elements that shape them. Th ey are whole: 
the bound ar ies they struc ture and the ﬂ ows 
of energy, money, ideas, language, social 
class and rank, law, popu la tion and power 
that char ac ter ize each world- system in its 
partic u lar devel op ment shape complete 
systems which operate as a complex 
entit ies. 
 Th e social construc tion of time and 
space evolves through rapid trans form a-
tions, a succes sion of diﬀ er ent dynam ics, 
between living forms and their inor ganic 
envir on ments aﬀ ects the atmo sphere, 
global temper at ure, ocean salin ity, oxygen 
in the air, the water cycles and the carbon 
and nitro gen cycles that guar an tee that life 
is sustained on our planet. 
 Th e devel op ment of Earth System 
sciences over the last decades has indic ated 
that human activ ity is deeply aﬀ ect ing 
the entire system. Th e atmo sphere, the 
geosphere, the cryo sphere, the biosphere 
and the hydro sphere are faced with new 
forces, mobil iz ing the Earth towards 
instabil ity and possible great ﬂ uc tu ations 
in its inter de pend ent dynam ics. 
 World- systems 
 Human systems and soci et ies have forms 
that develop over history. Th e speciﬁ c 
human rela tions are shaped, struc tured 
and hardened by these histor ical processes. 
Individuals, groups and soci et ies are 
shaped in their inter ac tions by these 
processes as much as they contrib ute to 
their dynam ics. Long- term inhab it a tion of 
cities, lands and territ or ies, intric ate 
networks of commu nic a tion, long- term 
devel op ment of every day life- forms and 
 Copper mine. Chuquicamata, Chile 1999.  ARMIN LINKE
Bloemenveiling Aalsmeer, fl ower auction, test room. Amsterdam, Netherlands 1998.   ARMIN LINKE  
 Greenhouse. El Ejido, Spain 2013.   ARMIN LINKE
ANTHROPOCENE 
massive level changes ( Steﬀ en, Crutzen 
and McNeill 2007 : 615). Hence, discus-
sions of the air are about the Earth too 
while the future of the geolo gic era might 
be some thing determ ined by the oceans 
and espe cially the melting ice (Wolﬀ  2014). 
 Th e concept of the Antropocene marks 
an inter twin ing of geolo gical Earth time 
and human history; it trig gers massive 
amounts of paper work, data, discus sions, 
confer ences, art works and philo soph ical 
ideas as well of course as misrep res ent a-
tions in its wake. Suggested by chemist Paul 
Crutzen in 2000 it has launched a wide 
debate in both geology and the wider 
academic and art communit ies. Th e term 
suggests that the ten to twelve millen nia of 
the Holocene is followed up by the accel er-
ated version of human impact on the planet 
( Crutzen 2002 ). One of the peri od iz a tions 
for the start of the Anthropocene marks it 
as start ing in the eight eenth century ‘when 
analyses of air trapped in polar ice showed 
the begin ning of growing global concen-
tra tions of carbon dioxide and methane’ 
(ibid.). In any case, the analyses usually 
converge around the period as one of new 
imbal ance in ‘the stocks and ﬂ ows of 
major elements in the plan et ary machinery 
such as nitro gen, carbon, phos phorus, 
and silicon’ ( Steﬀ en et al. 2007 : 614) as well 
as energy consump tion. Similar concepts 
have emerged since the nine teenth century, 
includ ing Antonio Stoppani’s ‘Anthropozoic 
era’, but only in the 2000s has the impact of 
the concept itself consol id ated around 
issues with polit ical and scientiﬁ c eﬃ  c acy. 
Already the earlier ideas marked the 
speciﬁ c diﬀ er ence of human impact from 
natural vari ation that has then become an 
object of analysis with speciﬁ c scientiﬁ c 
tools that discuss the histor ical aspects – 
what is a suit able start date for this period 
– as well as its future implic a tions: what is 
the tipping point of no return in the process 
of accel er a tion? Hence we are not dealing 
where diﬀ er ent forms of docu ment a tion 
and diﬀ er ent prac tices of power aﬀ ect 
the overall system. World- systems develop 
through tipping points, through trans itions 
that bring the systems from one level of 
complex ity and coher ence to another. Th is 
is a complex process which leaves strat i ﬁ c a-
tions in language, social rela tions, ideas 
and rituals. It also leaves mater ial forms in 
its wake: the intric ate geomet ries of cities, 
monu ments, ﬁ elds and infra struc tures that 
sustain a speciﬁ c form of a world- system 
are carried over from one world- system to 
a new one. Monuments, docu ments and 
tech no lo gies are the mater ial inscrip tions of 
world- systems. To decipher them, humans 
need to concep tu al ize their own history in 
rela tion to the history of the planet. 
 Anthropocene Observatory is a project 
by Territorial Agency (John Palmesino and 
Ann-Soﬁ  Rönnskog), Armin Linke and 
Anselm Franke. 
 See also Anthropocene, Capitalocene 
and Chthulucene; Resilience; Expulsions; 
Extinction; Hacking Habitat. 
 John Palmesino and Ann-Soﬁ  
Rönnskog – Territorial Agency 
and Armin Linke  
 ANTHROPOCENE  
 Much of the debate about the global 
climate change is oft en discussed through 
the amount of  CO 2 concen tra tion in the 
atmo sphere. But besides the atmosphere 
and questions about fresh water and ocean 
ecosystems, the geological has also become 
one central perspective for understanding 
the fundamental change concerning the 
planet. It relates to a recog ni tion of the 
Earth as a whole, inter locked feed back 
system with various nonlin ear speeds and 
rates of change that can however trigger
resources. Indeed, meta bol ism was a term 
used by Marx to ‘deﬁ ne the labor process as 
“a process between man and nature, a 
process by which man, through his own 
actions, medi ates, regu lates and controls 
the meta bol ism between himself and 
nature” ’ ( Foster 2000 : 141). Interestingly, 
the Modern era – so crucial as a refer ence 
point for the social sciences espe cially – 
was itself as a concept an attempt to purify 
Nature out of human activ it ies, which, 
however, itself hides the multiple attach-
ments across any arti ﬁ  cial Nature–Nurture 
divide and the diﬃ  culty of detaching 
politics from science and nature ( Latour 
2014a : 21). More speciﬁ c ally, and with a 
more acute aware ness of the polit ical 
economy of the Anthropocene, McKenzie 
Wark ( 2015a ) contin ues Marx’s theor et iz a-
tion by point ing out that one can actu ally 
under stand the Anthropocene as meta-
bolic rift s, move ment of mater i als and the 
labour that mobil izes these elements. 
 With the Anthropocene, any earlier 
peri od iz a tion is even more directly driven 
by a scientiﬁ c under stand ing of the Earth. 
It involves an analysis of human impact 
but also the other way round: to read 
human history through chem istry, the 
atmo sphere, the geolo gical and more. 
Th ere is an impli cit chal lenge here to the 
Humanities. It is hence no wonder that it 
becomes itself a useful trigger for a variety 
of approaches that are inter ested in the 
non- human and posthu man. Th ese are 
import ant ways to steer clear of the anthro-
po centric fallacy and towards, for example, 
a more geocentric under stand ing of the 
plan et ary life (see e.g.  Braidotti 2012 . 
 Bennett 2010 ). Furthermore, it intro duces 
new ways to think about time not merely 
in terms of human history but as time 
marked by chro no strati graphy that uses 
rock strata as the main focus for under-
stand ing evol u tion and change. As such, it 
reson ates with various ideas in the past 
with a naive assump tion of ‘balance’ of the 
planet but a histor iciz a tion of the chem ical 
doses and elements, of reac tions and 
processes as one signi ﬁ c ant context where 
the polit ics of exist ence of life unfolds. 
 In many ways, a lot of the accounts 
includ ing the more popular texts about the 
Anthropocene reson ate with histor ies of 
tech no logy: the emer gence of agri cul ture 
is one crucial threshold that has changed 
the chem ical rela tions of the Earth. Th e 
inven tion of ﬁ re is another. Th e steam 
engine gets a frequent mention in narra-
tives of the Anthropocene, as well as 
modern synthetic chem istry. One of the 
key issues is of course the radical change in 
the energy economy: from the use of wind 
and water to the excav a tion of fossil fuels 
such as coal and oil. Th e accounts of the 
Great Acceleration focus on the energy 
and war econom ies aft er 1945 with an 
intens i ﬁ c a tion since the 1950s because of 
the increase in nuclear bomb testing; the 
global processes of urban iz a tion; increase 
in fertil izer use and various other types 
of processes of tech no lo gical society 
( Zalasiewicz et al. 2014 ). 
 Humanities and social sciences have 
anyway in the past oft en relied on gener al-
iz ing peri od iz a tions. Human history has 
been divided into epochs of capit al ism, 
imper i al ism and colo ni al ism, as well as 
other earlier periods that oﬀ er heur istic 
support to under stand histor ical time. 
Some of the archae olo gical periods place 
special emphasis on the main mater i als 
around which culture is organ ized: the 
Stone Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age. Some 
of the later concepts have also under stood 
that the rela tion to natural resources is 
signi ﬁ c ant in order to under stand that 
period. For example, Karl Marx’s analyses 
are obvi ously very aware of the chan ging 
indus trial basis of produc tion, from agri-
cul tural rela tions to the new meta bol ism 
produced by capit al ism’s focus on natural
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ANTHROˉPOS 
has anyway to face up to the massive polit-
ical mobil iz a tion of the neolib eral agenda 
that is also global, unevenly distrib uted and 
extremely harmful across the continuum 
of matter- aﬀ ect that deﬁ nes the current 
ecology. In other words, even if the 
Anthropocene sets the import ant ques tion 
it might not be the best concep tual solu tion 
out there to solve the complex inter links 
between scientiﬁ c analysis of natural 
processes, polit ical agendas, economic 
drives and the aﬀ ect ive desire that still 
governs the very tightly fossil- fuelled state 
of the contem por ary era. Since the incep-
tion of the concept, the debate about 
massive- level geoen gin eer ing has also been 
ﬂ agged up as one option ( Crutzen 2002 ) 
although, to be sure, any such plan et ary- 
level design should be contex tu al ized in a 
wider real iz a tion about the polit ical 
economic stakes of the envir on mental 
disaster and its possible solu tions that 
involve an entan gle ment of polit ics, nature 
and design. 
 See also Capitalocene and Chthulucene; 
General Ecology; Earth; Four Elements; 
Posthuman Critical Th eory; Ecohorror; 
Extinction. 
 Jussi Parikka 
 ANTHR O¯ POS  
 Anthrōpos has content and prop er ties, 
both of which produce oblig a tions.  Logos 
(as language, speech and logic) attrib uted 
exclus ively to  ánthro pos , creates the oblig a-
tion for induct ive thought that sets it apart 
from animal language;  hexis  (as agen tial 
habit, engage ment with acts that are recog-
nized and shared by the social envir on-
ment) creates ethics;  to koinōnikon (the 
social) creates and demands polit ics. 
years of human it ies theory and philo sophy 
that open up new avenues towards tem-
por al ity (see for example  Grosz 2004 ). 
Time becomes detached from the speciﬁ c 
anthro po centric onto- epistem o lo gies to 
take into account the multi pli city of 
tempor al it ies and altern at ive meta phys ics. 
Th e Anthropocene arrives in contem por-
ary discus sions not merely as geology but 
as a polit ics of visual culture ( Mirzoeﬀ  
2014 ) and as a demand to rewrite the gene-
a lo gies of cultural theory ( Wark 2015a ). 
Furthermore, as a concept that refers to the 
scientiﬁ c era, it raises the ques tion relev ant 
to tech no logy schol ars, and to students of 
media and human it ies writ large: not what 
it does to humans only, but how nature is 
being framed, rearranged and targeted 
(cf.  Peters 2015 ). 
 While becom ing an import ant plat form 
to discuss climate change, oﬀ er ing impetus 
to both human it ies and art prac tices, the 
Anthropocene has its limit a tions. How far 
is it really possible to discuss the Age of 
Humans as really homo gen eously about 
the human impact when it actu ally should 
register the speciﬁ c economic and polit ical 
actions, oft en speciﬁ c to capit al ism, that 
have eﬀ ects very unevenly across the global 
south–north divide (see  Chakrabarty 
2009 )? Hence to speak of the Capitalocene 
( Moore 2014 ,  Haraway 2015a ,  2015b ) has 
also been sugges ted, as well as other related 
terms such as the Anthrobscene ( Parikka 
2014 ) and the Chthulucene ( Haraway 
2015a ,  2015b ). Th e Anthropocene is not 
saying that the human being really has 
agency but some thing more like culp ab il ity 
(Chun 2015). But how that culp ab il ity is 
being distrib uted is itself a rather burning 
polit ical ques tion. We need to be able to 
invest ig ate how the envir on mental debates 
and scientiﬁ c analyses respond as well as 
are also held back by the strongly anti- 
demo cratic forces of the neolib eral era 
(Brown 2014). Any sort of eﬀ ect ive polit-
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
ANTHROˉPOS
ἄνθρωπο ) (Plutarch,  Bioi , ‘Alcibiades’ 23.7). 
Even though the meaning of  anēr towards 
the end of the Classical era is ﬁ xed to mean 
an adult male,  ánthro pos never lost its non- 
gendered force and remains, to this day, 
the all- inclus ive, unmarked signi ﬁ er of the 
human being. 
 Plato, in Cratylus 399, has Socrates 
explain to Hermogenes that the meaning 
of  ánthrō pos ( ἄνθρωπος ) is that it is the 
only animal that exam ines ( ἀναθρεῖ ) what 
it sees ( ὄπωπε ), there fore only this examin-
ing animal is correct to be called  ánthrō pos , 
the one who is looking up at what it sees 
and considers it, exam ines it, is an animal 
that is  anath rōn ha opōpen ( ἀναθρῶν ἅ 
ὄπωπεν ), as it engages simul tan eously in 
an act of avowal and disavowal, as it avows 
the examined life and disavows the impos-
sibility of such an examin ing, it bespeaks 
the  krisis , the crit ical thoughts of the 
human as it belies its anim al ity. 
 Etymologicum Magnum  (the Byzantine 
lexicon origin ally compiled in the middle of 
the elev enth century  CE and printed in 
Venice in 1499 at the Greek print ing press 
of Zacharias Kalliergi) gives as a possible 
etymo logy for ánthrō pos  para to anō threin , 
‘the being that looks upwards’ ( παρὰ τὸ ἄνω 
θρεῖν ), continu ing that it is the only being 
that looks upwards, the only one that 
considers itself as a self, an etymo logy that 
has been proven to be erro neous since by 
other, more system atic etymo lo gists. But s i 
non è vero è ben trovato , since it actu ally 
creates an inter est ing tension with the 
etymo logy of  human from the Latin  Homo 
(earth ling) through the Greek  hamai 
( χαμαί ) that means ‘ground’ or ‘soil’ (and 
should not be confused with the other term 
that comes from Greek,  homo-  that means 
‘the same’ from which Havelock Ellis has 
been erro neously debited as having coined 
the term ‘homo sexual’). Th e spillage from 
ánthrō pos to human becomes import ant 
insofar as it permits a proleptic concep tual 
 Anthrōpos – a concep tual circu lar ity of 
meaning, from  ἀνήρ / ἀνδρός ( anēr in the 
nomin at ive /andrós in the genit ive), human 
being, and  ὤψ ( ōps ), face, appear ance, look, 
the one who looks like oneself, the being 
that looks like itself, human being writ 
large, sexless and gender less. We know this, 
that it is gender less and sexless, because 
Homer tells us that Zeus was the father of 
all humans and gods ( Ζεύς πατήρ ανδρών 
τε θεῶν τε ), and Oedipus drives the Sphinx 
to her death by utter ing the gender less 
response  ánthro pos (and I am reading it 
with a nod to Muriel Rukeyser) 1 to the 
riddle ‘what is that which having one voice 
becomes a quad ru pedal and a bipedal and 
a tripedal and it is at its strongest when it 
has the fewest’? that she had been taught 
by the Muses and she deployed to drive 
men to their deaths. 
 Only the Spartans among the Greeks 
had a gendered type of the term –  he 
anthrōpós , doubly marked with the femin-
ine article and the stress accent on the last 
syllable, the Spartans who knew the value 
they placed on the male and the radical 
alter ity of the female. Or, maybe, they 
marked it for precisely the oppos ite 
reasons, consid er ing that it was the female 
of the species, the mother, who, when her 
son came of age, thought him better dead 
than a coward as she handed him his shield 
and ordered him not to drop it on the 
battle ﬁ eld, but either to bring it back or to 
be brought back stretched out on it ( ἤ τάν, 
ἤ ἐπί τάς ). 
 Th ere is one occa sion where  ánthro pos 
appears in the femin ine. Plutarch uses  tēn 
ánthrō pon in order to denote a speciﬁ c 
woman, Timaia, wife of King Agis of 
Sparta, who fell so desper ately in love with 
Alcibiades that she bore his child in secret 
when he was a guest at the royal palace, 
while her husband was away at war – ‘such 
 eros had possessed the she- human,’ says 
Plutarch ( τοσοῦτος ἔρως κατεῖχε  τὴν
ARCHITECTONIC DISPOSITION 
49 ( Panourgiá 2009 ); the Tutsis by the 
Hutus in Rwanda (Hilsum 1994;  Moshman 
2011 ;  Baisley 2014 ); the Andaman Islanders 
at the end of the nine teenth century; the 
Jews by the Nazis; the Puerto Ricans by 
main land  US ( Herrera 2008 ). 
 Th ere is, then, a human being that tran-
scends the tran scend ental, moral or even 
ethical categor ies, in claim ing its origin as 
a human in its imman ence when faced 
with a tech no logy that is imbued with 
agency, the beating club, the chem ical 
weapon, the naked and raw power that 
seeks to oblit er ate it, or, even worse 
perhaps, to engin eer it diﬀ er ently but also 
with that which is invis ible: the economy, 
the markets, that seek to create a human 
being that will be compli ant diﬀ er ently, 
will ingly, submissively, that will be think-
ing of itself as a free agent when, in actu al-
ity, as we have seen repeatedly, it will be 
always already an indebted being. A human 
being, then, that is an anthrō pos. 
 See also Exclusion Zone; In/human; 
Lampedusa. 
 Note 
 1. Athena Athanasiou ( 2008 : 96) brought to 
my atten tion the poem ‘Myth’ by Muriel 
Rukeyser. 
 Neni Panourgiá 
 ARCHITECTONIC DISPOSITION  
 Ichnography, Scaenography, 
Orthography 
 Th e notion of ‘archi tec tonic dispos i tion’ is 
relev ant to a posthu man gloss ary in that it 
contrib utes crit ical methods to the new 
mater i al ist interest in ‘agen tial matter’. In 
the legacy of archi tec tural treat ies, this 
motion that brings the term human out of 
antiquity and provides a linguistic bridge 
with the post- antiquity scrip tural land-
scape. If ánthrō pos means the being that 
looks upwards, and homo means the earth-
ling who comes from the soil, then the 
gradual priv ileging of homo seems to be 
preg nant with Th e Fall, seems to be anti ci-
pat ing Christianity’s ‘dust to dust’. James 
Boon
help to develop methods of quantum- 
reading and quantum- writing inform a tion, 
that expresses itself in math em at ical models 
(Michel Serres) – a liter acy that can do 
without any ideal ized notion of symmetry, 
one for which ‘reading’ and ‘writing’ compre-
hends math em at ical think ing and the 
constitutive asym metry that propels its very 
invent ive ness (see  Equation ). 
 In his  Ten Books on Architecture , the 
Roman archi tect Vitruvius gathered all the 
exist ent know ledge on archi tec ture in one 
compre hens ive treaty includ ing the build-
ing of temples, of course, but also the 
construc tion of clocks (gnomon, sundi als) 
and the fabric a tion of machinery. Th e 
dedic ated aim of gath er ing all the distrib-
uted know ledge in archi tec ture has been to 
gener al ize from local customs and the 
ethical/reli gious mean ings attrib uted to 
the built works, and to propose rules and 
concep tual distinc tions for address ing and 
crit ic ally eval u at ing ‘the estab lish ment of 
public order’ in a manner that can preserve 
the built envir on ment’s ‘worth’ without 
decid ing upon an ulti mate refer ence for 
this ‘worth’.  1 Vitruvius proposed three 
categor ies –  util itas ,  ﬁ rm itas , and  venus tas 
– and intro duced six element ary concepts 
by which an archi tec tural object can be 
qual i ﬁ ed accord ing to these categor ies.  2 
None of these concepts is self- stand ing, 
like a separ ate metrics, but rather must be 
brought to work together by the archi tect 
in singu lar manners; the plan ning of this 
inter play – this is the work in which an 
archi tect can be more or less professed. 
 Vitruvius’ concep tual appar atus is to 
provide crit ical assess ment of such profes-
sion al ism, such that the ‘worth’ of archi tec-
ture can be preserved over gener a tions and 
regions without determ in ing it posit ively. 
It includes prac tical aspects as well as 
theor et ical ones, which he distin guished as 
 fabrica  and  rati ocin a tion . Th e six element-
ary concepts are: (1)  ordin a tio : cent ring in 
notion is part of the Roman inven tion of a 
set of categor ies for address ing, as I want 
to argue, some thing very similar to the 
‘mater ial- discurs ive set- ups’ that increas-
ingly come into focus today. Karen Barad 
rightly fore grounds that these set- ups have 
a systemic kind of agency (her ‘appar atus’ 
notion) that is at work, so to speak, behind 
the back of any crit ical conscious ness that 
might attempt to focus on it: either such a 
conscious ness focuses on the mater ial 
aspects, and remains blind to the discurs-
ive dispos it ive from within which it does 
so; or it focuses on the discurs ive aspects 
and thereby deprives an a- personal 
objectiv ity of this set- up’s autonomy and 
power of resist ing. Like the particle/wave 
set- up in quantum physics, both aspects 
are equally real and valid, but phenom ena 
in such set- ups cannot be traced in this 
double makeup at one and the same time. 
 Additionally, it is also impossible to 
bypass the decision by proceed ing in an iter-
at ive way, by stack ing discrete obser va tions 
such as to even tu ally compare them, and 
decide, in well- informed manner, in the end. 
For there is an irre vers ib il ity to such tracing 
itself that cannot be undone retro spect ively 
(see  Negentropy ,  Maxwell’s Demon ). Th is is 
precisely the simil ar ity this article points out 
between the ‘mater ial- discurs ive set- ups’ 
that have been at stake in the treat ies of 
archi tec ture since Vitruvius, and those now 
at stake in new mater i al ist polit ics, ethics 
and science: A built struc ture acts situ at ively, 
and asym met ric ally, with regard to whatever 
the inten tions of the archi tect might have 
been (what kind of beauty, truth, order or 
simply prag mat ics her build ing is to mani-
fest), as well as to how such inten tions are 
projec ted to the work by a public, in 
discourse. If agency is a lived rela tion rather 
than some thing one does or does not have, 
then archi tec tonic dispos i tion, and the 
concep tual triad that consti tutes it (ichno-
graphy, sceno graphy, ortho graphy), might
ARCHITECTONIC DISPOSITION 
(ther mo dy namic conser va tion), Vitruvius’ 
appar ent failure reveals itself as its very 
mark of distinc tion and excel lence: whatever 
the value this worth preserves may be – 
beauty, harmony, the good, etc. – such an 
approach at system at iz a tion in order to 
conserve, without ﬁ ght ing the impur ity of 
the system intro duced through trans form a-
tions (its histor icity), lives from  not specify-
ing the nature of this value in any determ in-
ate manner (see  Negentropy ,  Invariance ). 
 Th e preser va tion of this value would 
be achiev able only as a state of entropy, in 
which all of its artic u la tions would be 
equally ‘likely’ – meaning in the archi tec-
tonic context, which is concerned with 
criteria of adequacy rather than of happen-
ing, equally ‘adequat able’. Such an archi tec-
tonic state of entropy provides an atomism 
of value like the ther mo dy namic state of 
entropy (of the universe) provides an axio-
mat ism of forces. We can think of the 
dispos i tion of a work, its plan- ability, as 
such an entropic state, and we can call this 
‘archi tec tonic dispos i tion’, picking up on 
Alberti and Serlio, an ‘archi tec tonic model’. 
According to Vitruvius, the elements of this 
dispos i tion – quasi its vertices – must 
compre hend the full combin at or ial space of 
the total ity of possib il it ies the six element-
ary concepts are capable of determ in ing. 
‘Planning’ or ‘design’ – to use today’s 
concepts – can be read as a reduc tion of the 
combin at or ial poten ti ab il it ies, by conﬁ g ur-
ing the poten tial elements in an object ive 
way. 3 Vitruvius fore sees three dimen sions 
of concep tion which we know today as 
ground plan, elev a tion and perspect ive. 
He calls these three dimen sions of concep-
tion  ortho graphia (the natural, poten tial 
elements, in renais sance: elev a tion),  ichno-
graphia (the contrac tion of the poten ti-
abilit ies of these elements, in renais sance: 
ﬂ oor plan) and  sceno graphia (the oper a tion 
of contract ing, in renais sance: perspect ive 
or three- dimen sional plan). 
select ing one module from which the 
metrical unit for the overall taxa tion is to 
be derived in order to estab lish a singu lar 
work’s ‘ordin a tion’ by artic u lat ing and 
propor tion ing the members of the work; 
this idea of ordin a tion is analog ous to 
Vitruvius’ sugges tion that rather than ideas 
of the magnitudes and scales imper son-
ated by a partic u lar God, the human body 
can be refer ent to propor tion ate metrics in 
archi tec ture; (2)  disposi tio : regard ing the 
concep tion and dispos i tion of all the 
work’s elements in a gener al ized form in 
plans; (3)  eurythmia : the well- propor tioned 
overall appear ance of the partic u lar work; 
(4)  symmetria : for the harmony of the 
order with regard to the module from 
which its metrics is derived; (5)  decor or 
 propri ety: for custom iz a tion of the work 
accord ing to estab lished customs; and (6) 
 distri bu tio  (in Greek  oiko nomia ): for a 
distri bu tion of build ing mater i als and 
expenses adequate to the wealth and status 
of the customer. 
 Th e gener al iz a tion from local customs 
and the ethical/reli gious mean ings attemp-
ted by Vitruvius is so inter est ing because 
it proceeds in a manner of which I claim 
here that it  paral lels rather than imit ates 
or repro duces philo soph ical methods of 
gener al iz a tion and clas si ﬁ c a tion. Against 
this postu late there is a long tradi tion of 
Vitruvius’ recep tion; accord ing to this recep-
tion, archi tec ture, espe cially the public order 
it artic u lates in cities, was thought of as real-
iz ing an ideal of a cosmic order in the here 
and now of the world. Th e predom in ant 
critique on Vitruvius since the Renaissance 
is that his proposed methods operate with 
propor tion, without ever specify ing the 
attrib utes of the propor tions with precise 
ratios ( Fischer 2009 ). If, however, we return 
to his interest in the preser va tion of archi-
tec ture’s worth not through the discourse 
of aesthet ics, but through an approach 
informed by a climatic kind of ener get ics
and never self- evident, which he explored 
perhaps most prom in ently in his book 
 Le Système de Leibniz et ses Modèles 
Mathématiques (1968). Th e intro duc tion 
here is entitled ‘Ensembles théorique’ 
and Serres begins with the subchapter 
‘Scénographie, 
Ichnographie’. 
Scholars 
inter ested in Leibniz share a kind of embar-
rass ment, he begins. It concerns the irre-
con cil ab il ity of Leibniz’s rigor ously system-
atic thought, while this very system ati city 
doesn’t cease to refuse itself to rigor ous 
under stand ing. Leibniz presents his reader, 
as Serres puts it, 
 a poten tial ordon nance which lets itself 
be divined and which refuses itself 
cease lessly, a vague idea of a perceived 
coher ence seen a thou sand times in the 
mode of cava lier, and which hides its 
géometral, the sense of progress ing in a 
labyrinth of which one holds the thread 
but has no map. Oﬀ ered perspect ives, 
multi plied points of view, inﬁ n itely 
iter ated possib il it ies: it never seems that 
one could actu ally arrive at the exhaust ive 
limits of a synop tic, spread out, complete 
and actual plan.  
 Serres 1968 : 162 4 
 Serres here argues for a notion of the 
system which compre hends and organ izes 
all that obeys the prin ciple of iden tity, yet as 
an invari ant of which he assumes nothing 
else except that it be capable of absorb ing 
and integ rat ing all the vari ations that can 
actu ally be attrib uted to it; one can refer to 
such a notion of system only via math em at-
ical models, he main tains. Such models are 
not addressed as repres ent ing a reality (or 
ideal ity); they must be fash ioned in proﬁ le 
to each other rather than to a frame of 
refer ence. Th eir proﬁ les are to be worked 
out under the criteria of isomorph ism 
(equal ity with regard to their form al ity) 
between all of them, rather than correl a tion 
(linear hier arch ies of consequen ti al ity) or 
 If Vitruvius’ triad of archi tec tonic 
dispos i tion could be demon strated in a 
gener al ized form, then his archi tec tural 
theory might lend itself for devel op ing 
an inform a tion archi tec ton ics. It might 
provide orient a tion in how to gener al ize 
again from the numer ous spread ing out of 
discip lines that fall victim to increas ing 
local seclu sion, hermet icism and what 
could be called a certain banal ity of highly 
tech nical special iz a tion without systemic 
over view. Might the archi tec tonic categor-
ies that consti tute archi tec ture as a  profes-
sion (rather than as an art or as a science) 
provide a model of how to preserve the 
‘worth’ of the public order that is embod ied 
in know ledge? Th is, of course, is but a 
biased and spec u lat ive outlook. But here 
are some indexes of how such a re- 
interpret a tion of archi tec tonic dispos i tion 
could be started. 
 Th e notion of archi tec tonic dispos i tion 
has recently been picked up by Michel 
Serres, who argues exactly along these 
lines. Ichnography, scaeno graphy and 
ortho graphy are terms that allow him to 
theor ize a notion of system which contracts 
the ﬁ rst and the second laws of ther mo dy-
nam ics: its invari ant conser va tion (ﬁ rst 
law)  and its drift  towards dissol u tion 
(second law). ‘Physics describes a system,’ 
he argues, ‘but not one that is hier archic, 
deduct ive, or tightly ordered, as in the 
series of the Stoics: it is a set, a general equi-
lib rium, a balance sheet that takes account 
of the stochastic’ ( Serres 2000 : 128), as he 
puts it in  Th e Birth of Physics (1977), where 
he devel ops his notion of the  foedera 
naturae , the natural contract, in distinc tion 
to what he calls the  foedera fati , the contract 
of destiny. Serres’ interest in the contract, 
here and in other texts, can best be under-
stood as trans lat ing the dimen sion of 
archi tec tonic ‘ortho graphy’. Like this, one 
can decipher the same notion of system, 
always contrac ted to math em at ical models
ART 
 1. Cf. the preface by Vitruvius, dedic ated to 
his Ceasar. 
   2. I under stand these concepts as ele-
mentary in a quasi- mater ial, quasi- pre-
socratic sense: all of them factor in all of 
the archi tec tonic work, like the mater ial 
elements in the Timeaus factor in all of 
the sens ible bodies (all things are made 
up of ﬁ re, water, earth and air, and 
between them we can assume the lawful-
ness of a propor tion al ity: ﬁ re is to earth 
as air is to water). 
 3. One can say that Vitruvius intro duced 
models in ‘space’, and that the Renaissance, 
with Alberti, intro duced the models we 
are used to today (linea menta), as models 
of motion in ‘time’, and that in today’s 
discrete (digital) geomet ric paradigm 
we are discov er ing models in ‘life’ (see 
 Invariance ).   
 4. Here and in the follow ing I use my own 
trans la tion of Serres. 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 ART  
 Somewhat para dox ic ally, or almost too 
logic ally, the impossib il ity of art, pain fully 
obvious in any moment we attempt to 
speak of it, has proven immensely product-
ive. Ever since Th eodor W. Adorno opened 
his  Aesthetic Th eory with the notori ous 
disclaimer, ‘that nothing concern ing art is 
self- evident anymore, not its inner life, not 
its rela tion to the world, not even its right 
to exist’ ( Adorno 1997 : 1) reﬂ ec tions on 
art, on its concept, its onto logy, its rela tions 
(to society, to polit ics, to tech no logy) have 
thrived on the appar ent absence of its 
legit im acy or neces sity. Th e desol a tion 
expressed by Adorno, however, is the very 
ground from which the late modern ist 
critic’s subjectiv ity arises. Th e pres sure this 
repres ent a tion 
between 
model 
and 
modelled reality. In Serres’ notion of a 
math em at ical system ‘there is a plur al ity of 
possible paths of deduc tion’ (1968: 190); it 
is thus a notion of system which is ‘an irre-
vers ible order’ which ‘like a ladder’ is made 
up of a plur al ity of ‘orders, derived from an 
inﬁ n itely replic ated inﬁ n ity of inﬁ n it ies’ 
[par inﬁ n ité d’inﬁ nités inﬁ ni ment répli-
quée] (1968: 487). Within such a sheaf of 
orders, ‘my enun ci ations are univer sal and 
they conserve the analogy’ [analogy here 
is a ‘discrete multi pli city’ which Serres 
contrasts with a func tion as ‘a contin ued 
vari ation’] (492). Th is is why math em at ical 
model ling of the system, conceived as a 
ladder where diﬀ er ent orders, each inﬁ n ite, 
are leading from one to the other, progresses 
indeﬁ  n itely. Its steps are governed by ‘laws 
of binding one – multiple, ﬁ nite – inﬁ n ite, 
which are of value in multi valent manner 
for percep tion, liberty, knowing, creativ ity, 
remem ber ing etc., which all are at work 
also in the math em at ical model’ (493). 
Hence, to Serres it is not math em at ics that 
govern all these aspects of reality (percep-
tion, 
liberty, 
conscious ness, 
creation, 
remem ber ing, etc.); rather, he assumes, 
‘there is no rela tion of cause and eﬀ ect 
here, there is a paral lel ism of struc ture’ 
(580). Serres’ notion of a system which 
contracts the invari ant conser va tion (ﬁ rst 
law, ortho graphia)  and its drift  towards 
dissol u tion (second law, ichno graphia) is 
always integ rated, bound together (sceno-
graphia) math em at ic ally, in models. Th e 
system, thereby, is never repres en ted by its 
models. Th e rela tion between them is a 
contract that formu lates their mutu ally 
implic at ive cordi al ity, the ortho graphic 
polite ness that makes up the  foedera 
naturae , the Natural Contract: ‘the model of 
the system, this is the system of the model’ 
(481). 
 See also  Equation; Negentropy; Invariance.
and how to grow beyond expect a tion. 
Today’s unpre ced en ted expan sion of art 
may have origin ated in Enlightenment 
think ing and Romantic philo sophy that 
suppor ted a notion of art as ‘beaux arts’, 
‘schöne Künste’ or ‘ﬁ ne arts’, encom passing 
all genres and media from liter at ure to 
sculp ture. Th e subsequently estab lished 
custom of singling out the ‘plastic’ or ‘visual’ 
arts to embody ‘art’ proper remained trans-
it ory in histor ical terms, as the 1960s 
marked the advent of an ever- increas ing 
expan sion of the concept of ‘contem por ary 
art’, leading to art’s ‘radical open ness’ 
( Osborne 2013 : 57). 3   
 As a direct consequence of such expan-
sion any refer ence to ‘contem por ary art’ is 
alarm ingly in need of qual i ﬁ c a tion and 
concret iz a tion: where is it that I am speak-
ing from? Who is it that I am speak ing to 
(and for)? What are my stakes in the matter? 
Where do I place myself in the discourse? 
In 1972, critic Rosalind Krauss (who expli-
citly stated her age of 31 in the article) 
wrote a kind of open letter to the read er-
ship of the New York- based art magazine 
 Artforum , re- posi tion ing herself in the 
(already fading) debates around modern-
ism and ‘modern ist criti cism’ ( Krauss 1972 : 
48–51). Having discovered that the ‘histor-
ical neces sity’ of ‘modern ist paint ing’ no 
longer disclosed itself to her instantly (‘at 
the moment of percep tion of the work 
itself’) but increas ingly relied on ‘narrat ive’ 
and ‘tempor al ity’, Krauss considered herself 
now ready for a ‘larger modern ist sens ib il-
ity and not the narrower kind’ (ibid.: 51). 
She concluded her inter ven tion on a rather 
pecu liar note, insist ing on the personal and 
auto bi o graphic whenever it comes to say 
anything crit ic ally valid on art, since ‘it 
matters who one sounds like when what 
one is writing about is art. One’s own 
perspect ive, like one’s own age, is the only 
orient a tion one will ever have’ (ibid.). 
subjectiv ity exerts on the object of its 
reﬂ ec tion has proved constitutive. Th e 
crisis of art invoked in  Aesthetic Th eory 
may corres pond to a self, fash ioned as 
fragile and vulner able. But rather than 
turning to art for consol a tion, it looks for 
an elusive sense of ‘the possib il ity of the 
possible’ (ibid.: 132). Th e ques tion to be 
asked today may be whether art is still 
capable of provid ing such a futur ist sense 
of the not- yet. 
 At the time of writing this article, the 
concept of art ﬁ nds itself once again put 
under increased strain, partic u larly where 
it is being iden ti ﬁ ed as ‘contem por ary art’, a 
term that has become the subject of some 
debate. For regard less of the language 
deployed, 1 speak ing of art in the networked, 
glob al ized now, it is ‘contem por ary art’ that 
is being addressed. Th is penchant of 
narrow ing down (or, some would claim, 
expand ing) the discourse on art as univer-
sal category to one of ‘contem por ary art’ 
imme di ately concerns the very bound ar ies 
(or the proclaimed inex ist ence of any 
bound ar ies) of art. 2 Th e afore men tioned 
strain is composed of dissat is fac tion, dis-
illu sion ment, resent ment even. Arguably, 
contem por ary art is all about losing contact 
with the tradi tions of prac tising and theor-
iz ing art as a histor ic ally informed critique 
of the present condi tion, provid ing an idea 
of freedom and autonomy that enables a 
dialect ical, counter- imagin at ive rela tion to 
reality. Th e loss of self- evid ence, noticed 
by Adorno, has since become the utter 
denial of art’s legit im acy in the face of its 
appar ent failure to respond adequately to 
the extreme and inter linked disrup tions 
caused by climate change, neolib eral 
restruc tur a tion, 
invas ive 
digit al iz a tion, 
rampant racism, milit ar iz a tion of the 
every day or the new funda ment al isms. 
Happily indul ging in its own glamour, 
present ism and crit ic al ity, contem por ary 
art for many has mutated into an obscene
ART 
exists in our social and mater ial reality’ 
(Chan 2014 [2009]: 76). Chan’s critique of 
art that is bereft  of any autonomy which 
would enable it to reﬂ ect on (and resist) 
‘the global arrange ment to which life is 
increas ingly beholden for susten ance’ 
(ibid.) is heavily remin is cent of Adorno’s 
equally sombre (and prob lem atic) pursuit 
of the non- identical as a residue of aesthetic 
truth. Moreover, like Adorno, he refuses to 
bargain in the illu sion of a utopian rein ven-
tion of art’s situ ation through its expan sion. 
For even though art may not only be found 
in the places and insti tu tions proper to it 
(‘galler ies, nonproﬁ t spaces, museums, 
corpor ate lobbies, and such’), but every-
where else (‘on the sides of build ings, on 
aban doned grounds, in the sky, in make-
shift  kitchens, on river barges, at demon-
stra tions, in magazines, on human skin, 
as souven irs, and through speak ers and 
screens of every imagin able shape and size’ 
(ibid.: 82)), it merely expands and dissem-
in ates, Chan argues, as to stay func tional 
and oper at ive while aﬃ  rm ing the very 
total ity that grants it enti tle ment. Rather 
than multiply ing, rather than feeling every-
where at home, he concludes, art should 
become an agent of un- belong ing. 
 Th e tenet of art’s very home less ness and 
unten ab il ity, the demand of art’s refusal to 
signify is one of the most power ful (and 
certainly most diﬃ   cult) axioms in aesthetic 
theory. Where it is not exclus ively bound 
to an imper at ive to dissent, obli ging it 
to be ‘a form of expan ded ideo lo gical (and 
insti tu tional) critique’ ( O’Sullivan 2010 : 
197) or else ‘some kind of produc tion of 
signi ﬁ c a tion’ ( Nancy 2010 : 96), art may 
partake in an actu al iz a tion of other worlds, 
tempor al it ies and lives that do not neces-
sar ily corres pond to textual under stand ing 
and the routines of crit ical reading. 
Escaping repres ent a tion and its critique, 
however, usually comes with a price tag – 
 Th e crisis of modern ism embod ied in 
the expand ing universe(s) of contem por-
ary art that took root in the ‘larger modern-
ist sens ib il ity’ neces sit ated the fash ion ing 
of a subjectiv ity as speciﬁ c as possible: age, 
perspect ive, voice had to be forged into a 
crit ical iden tity prerequis ite of walking the 
expan ded ﬁ elds of post- modern ist art. But 
what happens to this ethico- polit ical ideal 
of the critic’s self once the situ ation gets 
completely out of control? Th e oft en 
lamen ted absence of the brand of strong 
criti cism cultiv ated by Krauss and her 
fellows in the 1970s and 1980s may be ulti-
mately ill- conceived; however, it points to a 
wide spread assump tion of power less ness 
with regard to today’s art. In fact, the entire 
ediﬁ ce of art’s concep tu al iz a tions seems 
on the verge of collapse and in dire need of 
an ethics that may be convert ible into an 
aesthet ics. Fantasies of escape and exodus, 
of reach ing contem por ary art’s ‘beyond’, 
of toppling indi vidual author ship in the 
name of parti cip a tion, of merging in activ-
ist polit ics, of invest ing in a ‘usolo gical 
turn’ (in order to revital ize art as a mode 
of oper a tion with eﬀ ects on the real; see 
 Wright 2013 ) abound. 
 Such visions resemble the well- known, 
albeit long- discarded (neo-)avant- gardist 
and product iv ist notions of the fusion 
of art and life, but their present urgency 
seems to stem from a some what diﬀ er ent 
analysis and exper i ence of crisis and 
despair. Among the possible infer ences to 
be made under the current predic a ment is 
the crit ical longing for an art that expli citly 
fails to be subsumed through the disar tic u-
la tion of any call to conform to the powers 
that be. Rendering the progress ive oppor-
tunism of the major ity of contem por ary 
art, artist Paul Chan projects a perfect 
negat ive picture of any future that art 
might have: ‘Art, by allying itself with 
contem por ary life, has found its purpose as 
a cunning system of medi ation, capable of
which are univer sal by default. In this 
philo soph ical context, aesthetic autonomy 
and art itself were largely to be under stood 
as attrib utes of human agency. However, 
the critique of aesthetic autonomy, the 
attack on the category of the artwork, the 
re- eval u ation of exper i ence and aﬀ ect, 
post- war art’s insti tu tional, geograph ical, 
tech no lo gical and epistem o lo gical expan-
sions, the discov ery of non- human actors 
and activ it ies in the making of art all 
amount to a situ ation in which the 
subjectiv it ies produced by and for art have 
changed for good. 
 See also Art in the Anthropocene; 
Contemporary, 
Th e; 
Gulf 
Labor; 
Metamodernism; Postimage; Posthuman 
Museum Practices.
ART IN THE ANTHROPOCENE 
colo ni al ism – that have resul ted in the 
massive trans form a tion of the Earth 
through indus tri al ized agri cul ture, resource 
extrac tion, energy produc tion and the 
wide spread use of petro chem ic als. 
 However, the Anthropocene, as a 
charis matic mega- concept, does import ant 
work by group ing together the envir on-
mental crises of the sixth mass extinc tion, 
climate change and the ongoing processes 
of terra form ing and increas ing toxi ﬁ c a tion 
of our world, as these are all written into 
the body of the Earth. Further, despite its 
troub ling re- asser tion of the Anthropos 
coupled with the elision of the ideo lo gical, 
polit ical and economic factors that have 
resul ted in this situ ation (and the disturb-
ing way in which ‘Man’ has again come to 
stand in for human ity) the Anthropocene 
asks us to re- think the traject ory of 
humans on this planet in both biolo gical 
and geolo gical terms. In other words, it is a 
concept that has the power to remind us of 
our limited and contin gent time on this 
earth, and that our being itself is tied to 
the rocks and other- than-humans that 
compose us. 
 So what does art have to do with all 
this? As I argue, with Etienne Turpin, in 
 Art in the Anthropocene (2015), the 
Anthropocene, in so far as we are to accept 
this term and its mobil iz ing poten tial, is an 
aesthetic event. I mean this in three ways. 
First, aesthet ics can be under stood from its 
etymo lo gical source in  aesthesis , that is, the 
percep tion of the external world by the 
senses, from the ancient Greek  αἴσθησις 
meaning sense percep tion. Taken in this 
light, the Anthropocene marks a period 
of defa mil i ar iz a tion and derange ment of 
sense percep tion. Th is is primar ily what is 
unfold ing around us: the complete trans-
form a tion of the sensa tions and qual it ies 
of the world. In other words, the world that 
we are born into is reced ing in front of 
 Fraser 2011 ), much of what has been said 
and written in this respect amounts to 
soci olo gical musings on how contem-
por ary art consti tutes a newly distrib-
uted world system repla cing the modern 
center/peri phery model by a network 
of ‘hubs’ (see e.g.  Stichweh 2014 ) and 
philo soph ical clas si ﬁ c a tions aiming at 
contem por ary art’s alleged post- media 
and 
trans dis cip lin ary 
char ac ter, 
its 
determ in ate disin teg ra tion and expan-
sion and speciﬁ c aesthetic and temporal 
polit ics (most inter est ingly perhaps 
artic u lated 
in 
 Osborne 
 Rebentisch 2013 ). 
 3. Th is bound ary- defying concept of art 
that super seded the various attempts by 
twen ti eth- century modern ists to impose 
medium- speciﬁ city as a norm is char ac-
ter ized by Osborne as ‘generic artistic 
modern ism’, a nomin al ist tend ency
 ‘equi val ent to the crisis of modern ism 
itself’ (p. 51). 
 Tom Holert 
 ART IN THE ANTHROPOCENE  
 Th e Anthropocene is a disturb ing concept. 
Imported from Geology to signify a 
proposed new epoch when human ity is the 
primary geolo gic agent, its life within the 
human it ies, arts and social sciences 
has been a troub ling one. Th is is primar ily 
because of the ﬁ gure of the Anthropos and 
the prob lem atic desig na tion of a univer sal 
species being that accom pan ies this ﬁ gure, 
as Andrew Malm, Jason Moore and Donna 
Haraway have all pointed out. Further the 
peri od iz a tion of the Anthropocene fails to 
do the crit ical analyt ical work of prop erly 
attrib ut ing the neces sary preced ents that 
give rise to this condi tion, namely, the 
asym met rical power rela tions entwined 
within a destruct ive economic system –
earth’. As T. J. Demos has argued, ‘Such 
imagery speaks to a problem artic u lated 
by recent theor ists of ecology – that the 
expan ded spatial and temporal scales of 
geology pres sure, if not alto gether exceed, 
human 
compre hen sion, 
and 
thereby 
present major chal lenges to repres ent a-
tional systems’ (2015: n.p.). Th e seem ingly 
endless ﬂ ow of numbers within the hyper- 
medi ated spec tacle of terminal capit al ism 
– 400  PPM of atmo spheric  CO 2 ; seven 
billion people; one in eight birds, one in 
four mammals, one in ﬁ ve inver teb rates, 
one in three amphi bi ans, and half of all 
turtles facing extinc tion; consum ing 400+ 
years of plan et ary biomass per day as fossil 
fuel – all artic u late the vast scales at which 
anthro po genic condi tions play out. To 
attempt to compre hend the vast ness of 
these global prob lems, the use of model-
ling is neces sary to begin to make sense of 
the data. But this logic of calcu la tion is not 
without its draw backs, as the Invisible 
Committee write, ‘what’s remark able is that 
he contin ues relat ing in the same disastrous 
manner to the disaster produced by his 
own disastrous rela tion ship with the world. 
He  calcu lates the rate at which the ice 
pack is disap pear ing. He  meas ures the 
exterm in a tion of the non- human forms 
of life’ (2015: 32, emphasis in original). At 
the same time, these ques tions of numer-
acy, of being liter ate in the graphs and 
charts and data produced through various 
scientiﬁ c discourses, are essen tial to a 
crit ical appar atus and are increas ingly an 
index of power within the tech nos cientiﬁ c 
bureau cratic manage ment of ecolo gical 
crisis. 
 Th ird, art is a polyarchic site of exper i-
ment a tion for living in a damaged world, 
oﬀ er ing a range of discurs ive, visual and 
sensual strategies that are not conﬁ ned by 
the regimes of scientiﬁ c objectiv ity, polit-
ical moral ism or psycho lo gical depres sion. 
Art can provide a space for dealing with the 
our eyes, causing a re- arrange ment of 
the sensory appar atus of our organ ism. 
Additionally, many of the threats to our 
health are not imme di ately sens ible: chem-
ic als that inﬁ lt rate and prolif er ate in the 
envir on ment or the gradual warming of 
the planet are hard to feel or see or touch. 
Th e rapid trans form a tions that we are 
exposed to, as organ isms, are also chan ging 
just as fast for the other- than-human 
creatures that also inhabit the earth. Th is 
sense of rapid reori ent a tion to the world is 
one of the reasons why creatures are going 
extinct at such extreme rates, as the worlds 
they inhab ited disap pear and as chem ic als 
are intro duced into the envir on ment so 
quickly and ubiquit ously that there is little 
time to adapt. Climate change, under these 
terms, can be under stood as a complete re- 
arrange ment of our sensory and percept-
ive exper i ence of being in the world, where 
the threat itself becomes hard to identify 
based on the sensory limit a tions of our 
bodies. As Nicholas Mirzoeﬀ  ( 2014 ) 
argues, the problem with these changes is 
that they are oft en written into the canon 
in a way that signi ﬁ es beauty. He uses the 
example of Claude Monet’s  Impression: 
Sun Rising (1873). Th is paint ing, one of 
the most circu lated images in art history, 
marks not just a partic u lar aesthetic shift  
asso ci ated 
with 
Impressionism, 
but 
portrays the intense smog produced by 
early indus tri al iz a tion. Th e fact that air 
pollu tion has been anaes thet ized into a 
kind of beauty marks one of the central 
prob lems of the Anthropocene era. Th is 
fetish iz ing of envir on mental destruc tion 
which troub lingly straddles the realms of 
beauty and awe can also be seen in the 
work of photo graph ers such as Edward 
Burtynsky and Andreas Gursky. 
 Second, the Anthropocene has been 
framed through modes of the visual: data 
visu al iz a tion, satel lite imagery, climate 
model ling and other legacies of the ‘whole
ART IN THE ANTHROPOCENE 
Garneau says, ‘What art does do – and what 
is diﬃ   cult to measure – is that it changes 
our indi vidual and collect ive imagin ar ies 
by particles, and these new pictures of the 
world can inﬂ u ence our beha vior’ (quoted 
in  Hill and McCall 2015 : ix). Th e arts 
are part of the emer gence of narrat ives 
about the ways in which we live in the 
world, narrat ives that can be damaging or 
vision ary, which can connect or dislo cate 
us from the earth. Th e fact that so much of 
Anthropocene discourse has been taken up 
in the arts merits more atten tion. 
 See also  Art; Anthropocene; Anthropocene 
Observatory; Ethereal Scent; Biological 
Arts/Living Arts; Ecohorror; Neuronal 
Aesthetics. 
 Heather Davis 
aﬀ ect ive and emotional trauma of climate 
change, dams and envir on mental pollu tion 
as it can hold together contra dic tions. We 
need modes of expres sion for the collect ive 
loss we are suﬀ er ing through and venues to 
express the emotional toll of living in a 
dimin ished world. Th is sense of multi pli-
city that is contained within art provides a 
way to sift  through the numer ous contra-
dic tions of our every day lives, to deal with 
diver gent and discon tinu ous scales of time, 
place and action. Art prac tice can also 
provide a space of propos i tions and future 
imagin ar ies, exem pli ﬁ ed by projects such 
as  Swale (2016) by Mary Mattingly, a ﬂ oat-
ing edible tree forest and self- contained 
ecosys tem on the Hudson River that resid-
ents and tour ists can visit and which 
provides a site for work shops and other 
forms of community engage ment. As David
the Human to involve non- human agents, 
through direct and exper i en tial engage-
ment ( Catts and Zurr 2014 ). 
 Biological Arts deals with the theory, 
prac tice, applic a tion and implic a tions of 
the life sciences; creat ing a plat form that 
actively engages in raising aware ness, by 
propos ing diﬀ er ent direc tions in which 
know ledge can be applied, and tech no logy 
can be employed. Th is can be seen as 
cultural scru tiny in action, artic u lat ing and 
subvert ing the ever- chan ging rela tions with 
life. Much of the work of biolo gical artists 
seems to be trans gress ive, tres passing into 
areas where ‘art should not go’. Yet it oft en 
does little more than cultur ally frame and 
artic u late mean ings to the manip u la tions 
of life that have become common place in 
the scientiﬁ c labor at ory. 
 Th is aesthet ic ally driven and confront-
ing treat ment of life by artists can create an 
uneasy feeling about the levels of manip u la-
tion oﬀ ered to living systems. Th is uneas i-
ness seems to stem from the fact that current 
cultural values and belief systems seem to 
be ill- prepared to deal with the consequences 
of applied know ledge in the life sciences. 
Life is going through some major trans-
form a tion, even if that might be more 
percep tual then actual. Th rough rigor ous, 
crit ical and indeed wondrous explor a tions 
in the life science labor at ory, Biological Arts 
begins a dialogue that engages with the 
extraordin ary poten tials and pitfalls of our 
new approaches to life itself. 
 However, Biological Arts is not a move-
ment with a coher ent mani festo; it is 
 B 
 BIOLOGICAL ARTS/LIVING ARTS  
 An artistic prac tice that involves the use of 
living biolo gical systems; in most cases the 
biolo gical systems are manip u lated and/or 
modi ﬁ ed by the artist using tech no lo gical/
engin eer ing biology as opposed to tradi-
tional modes of biolo gical inter ven tion. 
It is linked to the notion of emer ging 
know ledge and emer ging tech no lo gies. 
Biological Arts seems to work on the spec-
trum from the spec u lat ive to the actual, 
from the hyper bole to the disap point ing, 
form the techno- utopian to the contest-
able, while using living biolo gical systems 
as part of the process of art making. 1 
 Humans’ rela tion ship with (the idea 
of) life is going through some radical 
shift s; from the sub- molecu lar to the 
plan et ary, the cultural under stand ings of 
what life is and what we are doing to it 
are lagging behind the actu al it ies of 
scientiﬁ c 
and 
engin eer ing 
processes. 
From Synthetic Biology and Regenerative 
Medicine, through Neuroengineering and 
Soft  Robotics to Geoengineering – life 
is becom ing a tech no logy, a raw mater ial 
waiting to be engin eered; thus provid ing a 
new palette of artistic expres sion in which 
life is both the subject and object. Within 
the realms of science and engin eer ing, 
radical approaches to life, driven by mind-
sets of control, seem to be taken haphaz-
ardly; expos ing unin ten tional onto lo gical 
breaches, and calling for the urgent need 
for cultural and artistic scru tiny of the 
concept of life. Th is scru tiny goes beyond
BIOLOGICAL ARTS/LIVING ARTS 
forms of art, like Biological Arts, are 
ephem eral, tran si ent, in which by the end 
of the perform at ive dura tion they leave 
relics of remem brance. 
 Some may trace Biological Arts to 
Media Arts, where the artist’s engage ment 
with new tech no lo gies and their eﬀ ect on 
bodies and soci et ies are the point of 
interest. In the case of Biological Arts, 
these tech no lo gies are of the life sciences 
and there fore raise some unique consid er-
a tions, sens it iv it ies, ethics and applic a tions. 
Biological Arts is diﬀ er ent from Speculative 
Biology in that it works directly with living 
biolo gical systems. Avoiding the notion of 
the ‘spec u lat ive’ (with its capit al ist asso ci-
ations), it tends to align more with the 
notion of mater i al ity. Th erefore Biological 
Arts will be posi tioned in the spec trum of 
the actual, authen tic and contest able 
expres sions and further away from a 
ﬁ ction al ized and spec u lat ive approach. 
 Biological Arts is some times referred to 
as  bioart ; however, the term bioart seem to 
encom pass more than Biological Arts, in 
that bioart also includes, among other 
things, tradi tional art expres sions that are 
loosely dealing with the future of life, spec-
u lat ive Photoshopped images, and in some 
cases other branches of science not directly 
linked to biology. 
 See also Art; Art in the Anthro -
pocene; Transhumanism/Posthumanism; 
Hacking Habitat; Non-Human Agency; 
Technoanimalism; 
Speculative 
Post-
humanism; Vibrant Matter  
 Note 
 1. ‘It’s now a reality [that] artists are in the 
labs. Th ey are inten tion ally trans gress ing 
proced ures of repres ent a tion and meta-
phor, going beyond them to manip u late 
life itself. Biotechnology is no longer 
just a topic, but a tool, gener at ing green 
ﬂ uor es cent animals, wings for pigs, and 
merely an umbrella term to describe art 
that uses life and living systems as both its 
subject and object ( Yetisen et al. 2015 ). 
 Biological Arts has been seen as: 
 ● Critical/tactical media arts in which the 
artists actively critique, ques tion and 
prob lem at ize these devel op ments as 
well as the socio- economic contexts in 
which they operate ( da Costa and 
Philip 2008 ). 
 ● Promoting transhuman ism; diﬀ er ently 
to the posthu man approach, the trans-
human ist agenda serves the interest 
of the human (or some humans) in 
the quest to become a ‘better’ human 
and tran scend, through advance ment 
in science and tech no logy, into a seam-
less amal gam a tion of a tech no lo gical 
human. 
 ● Following a more tradi tional approach, 
some Biological artists follow the 
Formalist approach in which life 
becomes a raw mater ial for aesthetic 
expres sions 
concerns 
with 
form, 
perspect ive, colour compos i tion etc. 
that is supposedly devoid of socio- 
polit ical context. 
 ● Public engage ment with life science/
engin eer ing in which the artists are 
seen as either raising aware ness of 
techno- scientiﬁ c devel op ments, or as 
promot ing tech no lo gical devel op ments 
and suggest ing current and future scen-
arios. Some initi at ives have been 
actively trying to recruit artists to create 
public accept ance for tech no lo gies not 
yet real ized. 
 Biological arts has links to other forms of 
art which touch upon life – for example 
live art or perform ance art, where the 
human is the organ ism on display and 
serves as a subject and object; eco or envir-
on mental arts in which land scapes are 
being manip u lated and explored. All these
viotá (“βιοτά”) instead of zōē to the same 
eﬀ ect. 
Th e tenses of the verb zēō (ζήω-ῶ) are 
divided almost equally between zoë/zōē 
and bios/vios: from zōē come the Present 
zō, Simple Past ezōn, and the rare Future 
zēsō; while from vios come the common 
Future viōsomai, Aorist B eviōn, Present 
Perfect veviōka, Past Perfect eveviōkein.  
Zōthalmios and viothalmios in Pindar’s 
7th Olympian Ode (0.7.10) both mean the 
preservation of life, and the Sōsivios (life-
saving) incantation to Asklēpios is asking 
obviously for the saving of zoē (life itself) 
not of the accumulation of knowledge and 
experiences that the rigid distinction 
between zoë/bios that Giorgio Agamben 
reads in bios; see, for instance, the 
inscription Sōsivios Asklēpiō kai Ηhygeian 
euhēn, that appears on a votive oﬀ ering 
plaque exhibited in the New Acropolis 
Museum. Graﬃ  ti that appears scrawled on 
walls in Greece since the beginning of the 
ﬁ nancial crisis in 2010 demand “zōē, óhi 
epiviōsē” (life, not simple survival); modern 
and ancient Greek share the locution, 
descriptive of unspeakable suﬀ ering, such 
as when Sophocles has Ismene respond to 
Antigone’s question “how we are going to 
use up our life (alōmenai viou) trying to 
procure our hard-to-ﬁ nd food?” (ἀλώμεναι 
βίου δύσοιστον ἕξομεν τροφάν;) by 
conceding that their life (βίος) will be 
unlivable (ού βιωτός) aft er the death of 
their father (ὁ μέλλων βίος οὐ βιωτός). 
Sophocles here is certainly conﬂ ating the 
meaning of zōē as a biological process, 
with the meaning of bios as the cumulative 
quality of texture of that life. Th e binary 
negation of the form bios is found in other 
instances in Greek grammatology, such as 
in the atimōn tēn gynaikan kai ton vion 
aviōton paraskeuazōn (he humiliated the 
woman and created an unlivable life) in 
Aishinēs Against Timarchos (par 176); or 
ton dhe mohthēron kai aviōton autois 
sculp tures moulded in biore act ors or 
under the micro scope, and using  DNA 
itself as an artistic medium’ ( Hauser 
2003 : 3).    
 Oron Catts 
 BIOS  
Bios/ zoë [vios/zōē] is the foundational 
property of ánthrōpos, the site that both 
binds and delimits ánthrōpos to and from 
the rest of the other animals. Th e two 
forms of the term are far more similar in 
content and context, whether in Aristotle 
or anywhere else in Greek language, 
ancient or modern, than what has recently 
been made to be. Although not entirely 
conjoined, they are far from being distinct. 
Th e intricacies and intertwining of the two 
words are attested from the crudely 
grammatical langue, i.e. the structure of 
the verb zēō (ζήω-ῶ), to the most intricate 
parole that includes locutions such as vios 
zoēs (the life of life) in Plato’s Epinomis 
(982a), or the Homeric complex zōēs d’ 
agathon vion (hence the ﬁ ne vios of zoë, 
Odyssey O: 491). In general terms, it 
appears that zōē
BLUE HUMANITIES 
inserted a “line of conjugation along 
which bíos is exposed to zōē, naturalizing 
bíos as well”, problematizing thusly the 
presumed dis junction of the two aspects 
of life (2008: 14). 
Rosi Braidotti complicates the gesture 
of distinction even further when she 
argues that it was Christianity that left  its 
indelible mark upon the relationship (and 
the distinction) between zōē and bios, still 
retaining the semantic rigidity proposed 
by Agamben, even though I suspect that 
this rigid distinction that Braidotti traces 
through Christianity might be more 
pronounced in Western than in Eastern 
Christianity (where zōē aiōnios—eternal 
zōē, eternal life—is found only in Christ). 
But Braidotti sees correctly that the 
examined life of Plato and Aristotle, bios 
theoretikos, the “self-reﬂ exive control 
over life”, in Christianity has come to be 
colonized by the “male, white, heterosex-
ual, Christian, property-owning, standard-
language-speaking citizens” (2008: 177–
178).  
 See also Anthrōpos; Animacies; Kin; 
Vibrant Matter; Zoe; Posthuman Critical 
Th eory. 
 Neni Panourgiá 
 BLUE HUMANITIES  
 Blue Humanities names an oﬀ -shore 
traject ory that places cultural history in an 
oceanic rather than terrestrial context. 
Recognizing, in the words of science 
ﬁ ction writer Arthur C. Clarke and numer-
ous marine biolo gists, that ‘the name of 
this planet should be Ocean, not Earth’, 
blue human it ies schol ar ship uses the 
alien at ing pres sure of the deep ocean to es-
trange famil iar stories and rewrite famil iar 
narrat ives. Against discourses that situate 
kathistōnta ton vion (while the wicked one 
who had made their life unlivable) in John 
Chrysostom (:465), an expression perfectly 
legible in Modern Greek (mou’ kanes ton 
vio aviōto).  Of course, all this becomes 
further complicated by the locution zō 
vion (ζῶ βίον), as it appears in Demosthenes 
Against Aeschines 
(18, 
263) 
where 
Demosthenes accuses Aeschines of having 
lived his life under democracy as a hare 
lives his life—in constant trembling and 
fear: lagō vion ezēs (λαγὼ βίον ἔζης). In 
Attican Greek the common usage to 
denote “to live” is zō or vioteuō (ζῶ, βιοτεύω, 
Present tense), ezōn (ἔζων, Simple Past). As 
Vernardakis points out, the Atticans used 
the form eviōn (ἐβίων) and veviōka 
(βεβίωκα) instead of ezēsa, ezēka (ἔζησα, 
ἔζηκα) to mean “I have lived”.  
In other words, and with every respect 
due to Giorgio Agamben, his theory 
regarding zōē and vios appears to be based 
on a presumed rigid distinction between 
the two, when he writes “the Greeks had 
no single term to express what we mean 
by the word ‘life.’ Th ey used two terms 
that, although traceable to a common 
etymological root, are semantically and 
morphologically 
distinct: 
zoë, 
which 
expressed the simple fact of living common 
to all living being (animals, men, or gods) 
and bios, which indicated the form or way 
of living proper to an individual or a 
group” (1995: 1).  Th ere is no question that 
the two forms of the word are not 
tautological, but there is also no question 
about the fact that when Aristotle talks 
about the act of living well he uses the 
form zēn (as in eu zēn) rather than eu 
viōnai, which would be equally available to 
him, if the distinction that he was making 
needed to be disinfected from the polluting 
(or simplistic) implications of animality. 
On this precise point (and thinking on the 
antinomies present in the conceptualiza-
tion of Biopolitics) Roberto Esposito has
of new conﬁ g ur a tions of bodies, selves and 
subjectiv ity, oceanic schol ar ship ﬁ nds disor-
i ent ing posthu man turns in ancient as well 
as ongoing discourses of fear and fascin a-
tion in rela tion to the great waters. Th e 
ocean haunts Western culture as bound ary 
and chaos, from tearful Odysseus’s ﬁ rst 
appear ance in Homer’s epic, lament ing his 
salt water exile, to the georgic vision of 
Hesiod that asserts the only happy men are 
those with no need to go to sea ( Works and 
Days ), to the Biblical vision of the New 
Jerusalem in which ‘there was no more sea’ 
(Rev. 21.1). We fear and love the sea, a salty 
posthu man body along side which we place 
our own salty and watery bodies. Th e 
prehis tory of the posthu man, the blue 
human it ies suggests, lies under wa ter. 
 Beneath the surface of the ocean lies a 
vast ness we compre hend as poorly as the 
surface of Mars. In the roughly 90 per cent 
of our planet’s biosphere that lives under wa-
ter prom ises of biotic opulence ﬂ oat, along 
with carbon- eating phyto plank ton, glossy- 
picture-ready cartoon ish life forms and 
an invis ible depth that gnaws at the ocean 
swimmer’s imagin a tion. Melville’s cabin- 
boy, having fallen over board from his 
chasing whale boat, ﬁ nds mad visions of 
total ity beneath his feet: ‘Pip saw the multi-
tudin ous, God- omni present coral insects, 
that out of the ﬁ rm a ment of waters heaved 
the colossal orbs. He saw God’s foot on 
the treadle of the loom’ ( Melville 1999 : 
319). According to liter ary scholar Josiah 
Blackmore, the oceanic turn of early modern 
culture provides poets and writers with a 
potent meta phor for endlessly reced ing 
depth that would profoundly shape modern 
ideas of selfh ood ( Blackmore 2012 ). As 
sea levels rise and storms ravage coastal 
settle ments in the Anthropocene, uncom-
fort able and disor i ent ing entan gle ments of 
sea and self become increas ingly relev ant to 
twenty- ﬁ rst-century writers, artists and 
activ ists. 
human cultures in pastoral ﬁ elds, enclosed 
gardens or teeming cities, the blue human-
it ies pose the sailor and the swimmer as 
repres ent at ive ﬁ gures, each diﬀ er ently 
threat ened by and attuned to an inhos pit-
able ﬂ uid envir on ment. Sailors ﬂ oat with 
tech no logy, hoping that their vessels stay 
oﬀ  the rocks. More vulner able swim mers 
use prac tised motions to keep their bodies 
aﬂ oat. Th e inhuman ocean, on which 
humans depend for food and trans port but 
in which we cannot long survive, pushes 
human it ies schol ar ship into alien envir on-
ments. Th e blue human it ies ﬁ nd posthu man 
alien a tion in a history of human–ocean 
contacts that stretch from prehis tory to last 
weekend’s trip to the beach. 
 Th e turn toward blue human it ies 
reveals mari time history, with its passion 
for tech nical exactitude and, partic u larly 
in a western European context, conser va  -
t ive histori ograph ical methods, uneas ily 
making space for a posthu man turn. 
Literary critics, envir on mental schol ars, 
sea- level activ ists, poets and artists are 
turning to the sea to place human histor ies 
in more- than-human contexts. Oceanic 
perspect ives replace stories of national 
expan sion or decline with multiple vectors 
of move ment, so that human history 
becomes a story of multiple estrange ments 
rather than progress ive settle ments. With 
partic u lar atten tion to the constantly 
recon sti t uted loca tions where sea meets 
land, blue human it ies schol ar ship removes 
human actors from controlling heights and 
plunges them into uncer tainty, move ment 
and dissol u tion. 
 Perhaps the richest histor ical paradox of 
the oceanic turn in theor et ical schol ar ship 
is the rich and oft en famil iar archive of 
cultural history that this method enables 
us to redis cover. Unlike some futur ist or 
tech no lo gic ally framed versions of the 
posthu man project, which imagine twenty- 
ﬁ rst-century humans on the bleed ing edge
BLUE HUMANITIES 
Odysseus, Aeneas and Jonah to Ishmael, 
Robinson Crusoe and the story of the 
 Titanic . Especially during periods of mari-
time expan sion, from the Roman empire to 
the settle ment of the New World to Paciﬁ c 
island- hopping in the nine teenth century, 
ship wreck narrat ives provide stark visions 
of human ity caught between divine ﬁ at and 
the insuﬃ   cient promise of human agency. 
Th e chastened but neces sary tech nical 
labours of sailors in crisis repres ent valu able 
stories of humans surviv ing (some times) in 
the face of non- human powers. 
 Researching repres ent a tions of ship-
wreck in and beyond the early modern 
period has led me to deploy four subcat-
egor ies or inter pret ive clusters for human–
ocean encoun ters: wet glob al iz a tion, blue 
ecocriti cism, salt aesthet ics and ship wreck 
modern ity. Each of these double- barrelled 
phrases iden ti ﬁ es a traject ory for the blue 
human it ies in the future. New work in 
femin ist and ecoma ter i al ist models also 
provides rich seas to cross, as do the 
continu ing reson ance of such meta phors as 
the ‘ship of state’ and such geographic 
constructs as the World Ocean. In elab or at-
ing these four categor ies, I hope to identify 
currents for the blue human it ies rather 
than setting bound ar ies on the element 
that always over ﬂ ows all bound ar ies. 
 
 Wet Globalization: Twenty- ﬁ rst century 
responses to glob al iz a tion some times ﬂ y 
above the earth with passen ger planes. 
Blue human it ies schol ar ship recalls that 
histor ic ally and still today, the global 
economy ﬂ oats on the ocean. 
 
 Blue Ecocriticism: Th e sea’s over whelm ing 
pres ence in the natural envir on ment 
reminds us that this element, long margin-
al ized by green think ing, has the poten tial 
to revo lu tion ize ecolo gical thought in a 
post- sustain ab il ity context. 
 
 Th e long liter ary and cultural history of 
human entan gle ments with ocean butt up 
against what liter ary scholar Robert Foulke 
( 1997 ) has called the twen ti eth century’s 
turn away from mari time culture. While 
global capit al ism’s goods still ﬂ oat on the 
broad oceans, which Hegel called the 
native element of exchange and economic 
expan sion, the shift  from schoon ers to vast 
container ships has dehu man ized modern 
human ity’s rela tion ship with the ocean 
( Hegel 1967 [1821] : 151). In much of the 
twenty- ﬁ rst-century 
world, 
we 
have 
become communit ies of swim mers, not 
sailors. As the artist and ﬁ lm- maker Allan 
Sekula has power fully shown, the human–
ocean inter face has become increas ingly 
mech an ized 
and 
dehu man ized, 
even 
though robot- piloted vessels still trans port 
our economy’s life- blood across phys ical 
oceans ( Sekula 1996 ; Sekula and Burch 
ﬁ lm 2010). As the size of container ships 
grows along with their auto ma tion, fewer 
and fewer merchant marine sailors ply the 
oceans – though it seems note worthy that 
the emblem atic ﬁ gure of the pirate has not 
entirely disap peared. 
 My own work in the blue human it ies 
explores the posthu man envir on ment of 
the sea as a space espe cially valu able in our 
era of Anthropogenic climate change. Th e 
unstable and destruct ive envir on ment in 
which we live now increas ingly resembles 
dynamic sea rather than stable land. 
Agricultural and pastoral visions of 
sustain ab il ity and predict ab il ity are giving 
way to narrat ives of threat en ing and unre-
li able envir on ments. Th ese posthu man 
and post- sustain able narrat ives can be 
terri fy ing – but I suggest that oceanic liter-
at ure and culture can provide us with a 
rich cultural archive for raising new kinds 
of envir on mental ques tions. 
 No trope in the oceanic archive seems 
more reson ant than ship wreck, an ancient 
story of disor i ent a tion and disrup tion that
types of ‘somatic bodies politic’ (those 
whose aﬀ ect ive- cognit ive patterns and 
trig gers ﬁ t the func tional needs of the 
system) while those social systems or ‘civic 
bodies politic’ are them selves bodily in the 
sense of direct ing mater ial ﬂ ows. 
 Th e term was developed in dialogue with 
and can be seen as reson ant with numer ous 
scientiﬁ c and philo soph ical projects that 
can be asso ci ated with the ‘posthu man’. 
Among them would be the histor ical- 
libid inal mater i al ism of Deleuze and 
Guattari (1984, 1987), the enact ive biology 
and cognit ive science of Evan Th ompson 
( 2007 ), the cultural neuro plas ti city of Bruce 
Wexler ( 2006 ), the evol u tion ary tech ni city 
of Andy Clark ( 2003 ), the devel op mental 
systems theory of Susan Oyama ( 2000 ) and, 
aft er the fact, the radical black femin ism of 
Sylvia Wynter ( Weheliye 2014 ). 
 Bodies politic are embod ied, with indi-
vidu ated physiolo gical and psycho lo gical 
somatic dimen sions, and they are embed-
ded in multiple and over lap ping socio- 
polit ical rela tions with other bodies 
politic, rela tions which are them selves 
as well physiolo gical and psycho lo gical. 
We can thus distin guish compos i tional 
and temporal scales for bodies politic. 
Compositionally, we can distin guish ﬁ rst- 
and second- order bodies politic. First- 
order bodies politic are at the ‘personal’ 
scale, 
whereas 
second- order 
bodies 
politic can be at either the ‘group’ or ‘civic’ 
scale. Temporally, we can distin guish the 
short- term or ‘punc tual event’ scale, the 
mid- term or habit/train ing/devel op mental 
scale, and the long- term histor ical scale. It 
must be remembered, however, that these 
scales are analyt ical rather than concrete; 
all concrete bodies politic are imbric a tions 
of all compos i tional and temporal scales. 
 An indi vidual, then, is a ﬁ rst- order 
body politic, at once social and somatic, 
embed ded and embod ied, connec ted and 
 Salt Aesthetics: Th e disor i ent ing pres sure 
of the inhuman envir on ment of the sea has 
inﬂ u enced artists and poets from Homer 
to J. M. W. Turner and beyond. Salt water 
carries aesthetic force. 
 
 Shipwreck Modernity: From an oceanic 
perspect ive, the story of emer ging modern-
ity resembles a cata strophe- ridden epic of 
ocean- fuelled expan sion and its attend ant 
disasters. 1 
 
 Responding to the alien at ing pres sure of 
the ocean on human bodies and insti tu-
tions makes the blue human it ies a form of 
posthu man invest ig a tion. With cognates 
from cyborg studies, post- sustain ab il ity 
ecocriti cism, cata strophe studies and other 
discourses that separ ate humans from the 
spaces that comfort them, the oceanic turn 
in human it ies schol ar ship combines an 
ancient discourse that still thrives in 
contem por ary culture with a modern 
under stand ing of dynam ism and change 
in the rela tion ship between humans and 
their envir on ments. 
 See also Earth; Green/Environmental 
Humanities; Monster/Unhuman; Post-
disciplinarity. 
 Note 
 1. Th ese points are adapted from Steve 
Mentz,  Shipwreck Modernity: Ecologies of 
Globalization, 1550–1719 (Minneapolis: 
Minnesota University Press, 2015), 
xxix–xxx. 
 Steve Mentz 
 BODIES POLITIC  
 ‘Bodies politic’ ( Protevi 2009 ) imbric ate the 
social and the somatic: the repro duc tion of
BODIES POLITIC 
and let live’. In most synchronic epis odes a 
quite precisely limited virtual reper toire of 
aﬀ ect ive cognit ive response is avail able (a 
limit a tion of all that the body could do, 
modelled as a regu larly recur ring attractor 
layout) and eﬃ  c a cious (although we can at 
any time be over whelmed by events that 
seem ‘sense less’ to us and that scramble our 
sense- making 
‘codes’). 
Diachronically, 
however, we can see changes at crit ical 
points as intens ive processes disrupt actual 
sets of habits; this can be modelled as the 
produc tion of new attractor layouts, and is 
exper i enced as psychic turmoil or excit ing 
novelty. During child hood, such trans itions 
in aﬀ ect ive cogni tion are well mapped by 
devel op mental psycho lo gists, while even 
in adult hood trau matic events or ﬂ ashes 
of insight can profoundly rearrange our 
habitual ways of making sense, that is, 
rearrange the virtual reper toire, modelled 
as the produc tion of new attractor layouts. 
 A 
second- order 
body 
politic 
is 
composed of indi vidu als who are them-
selves ﬁ rst- order bodies politic. Here we 
ﬁ nd the inter ac tion of the personal with 
the group compos i tional scale, where 
encoun ters can be one- oﬀ  occur rences or 
can be patterned and custom ary or even 
insti tu tion al ized (and thus operate at the 
border of group and civic). A second- order 
body politic is at minimum a couple, but 
can be larger; a second- order body politic 
has itself somatic and social aspects in both 
physiolo gical and psycho lo gical dimen-
sions. A second- order body politic has a 
physiology, as it regu lates mater ial ﬂ ows (1) 
among its members (the ﬁ rst- order bodies 
politic as the compon ents of its body) and 
(2) between itself (its soma as marked by its 
func tional border) and its milieu. For 
example, a second- order body politic might 
regu late the produc tion, distri bu tion and 
consump tion of food and drink: think of 
the way a family kitchen is a distri bu tion 
node for aﬀ ect ively charged mater ial ﬂ ows. 
indi vidu ated, in both physiolo gical and 
psycho lo gical dimen sions. Th is is the 
micro- level of compos i tional analysis, the 
personal. When viewed synchron ic ally (that 
is, on a relat ively short time scale), a ﬁ rst- 
order body politic is a dynamic physiolo-
gical system that regu lates its mater ial and 
ener getic ﬂ ows as they enter, circu late 
within and leave the socially embed ded yet 
indi vidu ated body to take part in the 
economy of higher- order bodies politic at 
the group and civic scales. Th ese dynamic 
physiolo gical patterns can be modelled as 
basins of attrac tion in the phase space of the 
body, as regions of its virtual, and are exper-
i enced as back ground aﬀ ects, as sharp or 
diﬀ use feel ings of well- being, unease or any 
of a variety of inter me di ate states. Events 
on the fast/personal scale are seen neur o lo-
gic ally as the form a tion of reson ant cell 
assem blies or  RCA s. Viewed diachron ic ally 
(that is, on a relat ively slow mid- term/
habitu ation or long- term/devel op mental 
time scale), the patterns of this physiolo-
gical ﬂ ow regu la tion coalesce through child-
 hood, change at crit ical points enter ing and 
leaving puberty, and oft en settle down into 
stable habits during adult hood. In other 
words, system patterns gradu ally crys tal lize 
or actu al ize as intens ive processes disrupt 
previ ous patterns; this can be modelled as 
the construc tion of new attractor layouts, 
and is exper i enced as being out of touch 
with your new body (the famous gawk i ness 
of adoles cents). 
 Psychologically, 
the 
ﬁ rst- order 
or 
personal body politic engages in aﬀ ect ive 
cogni tion, making sense of the situ ations 
in which its somatic life is lived in socio- 
polit ical embed ded ness. Th is making sense 
is profoundly embod ied; the body subject 
opens a sphere of compet ence within which 
things show up as ‘aﬀ ord ances’, as oppor-
tun it ies for engage ment, and other people 
show up as occa sions for social inter ac tion, 
as invit a tions, repul sions or a neutral ‘live
28 November 1947, Antonin Artaud 
declared war on the organs, intro du cing 
the idea of a body without organs 
that would be free from the captur ing 
conﬁ ne ments of auto matic reac tions and 
habitual patterns. In their co- authored 
philo sophy books  Anti-Oedipus (1972) 
and  A Th ousand Plateaus (1980), Gilles 
Deleuze and Félix Guattari propose 
Artaud’s body without organs as a concept 
to critique western Enlightenment forms 
of autonom ous subjectiv ity. While Deleuze 
and Guattari never expli citly relate the 
body without organs to the posthu man, 
the concept may be relev ant to under stand 
why N. Katherine Hayles in  How We 
Became Posthuman can conclude that ‘we 
have always been posthu man’ ( Hayles 
1999 : 291). 
 For Deleuze and Guattari the body 
without organs is an evolving concept. In 
 Anti-Oedipus it is intro duced in rela tion to 
the body of ‘the schizo’ that resists the 
habitual organ iz a tion of the body. Hence 
the refer ence to Artaud, who in all his 
deli ri ous and artistic expres sion points out 
that under neath the tradi tion ally coded 
body with an assigned place and role in 
society, under neath the organs, there is a 
chaotic, messy world full of intens ive 
poten ti al ity. Men, women, chil dren; all 
have their place in a social hier archy. 
Physical labour, bearing chil dren, sitting 
up straight in class; all have an orderly 
place for their organs. Th e (schiz oid) 
body without organs deﬁ es the social code 
and delib er ately ‘scrambles all the codes’ 
( Deleuze and Guattari 1972 : 15). In  A 
Th ousand Plateaus  Deleuze and Guattari 
invite us to ‘make a body without organs’, 
to exper i ment (artist ic ally, socially and 
philo soph ic ally) and ﬁ nd new ways of 
relat ing to the body: ‘Why not walk on 
your head, sing with your sinuses, see 
through your skin, breath with your belly?’ 
(1980: 151) Th ey elab or ate the liber at ing 
Th is regu la tion of group system dynam ics 
can be seen as construc tion of a virtual 
reper toire, modelled as the produc tion of 
an attractor layout, and aﬀ ect ively exper i-
enced as the back ground aﬀ ect or mood of 
the group. A second- order body politic can 
also be studied psycho lo gic ally, as it regu-
lates inter- somatic aﬀ ect ive cogni tion, the 
emotional and mean ing ful inter changes 
(1) among its members, and (2) between 
their collect ive aﬀ ect ive cogni tion and that 
of other bodies politic, at either personal, 
group or civic compos i tional scales. In 
other words, groups have char ac ter istic 
ways – a limited virtual reper toire – of 
making sense of what happens, on the basis 
of which decisions take place as actu al iz a-
tions or selec tions from that reper toire. 
Th ese decisions can be seen as chan nel ling 
toward an end state, modelled as the 
approach to an attractor in the group’s state 
space, and exper i enced as a spon tan eous 
agree ment in which the collect ive subject 
makes up its mind: ‘all of a sudden it 
dawned on all of us that this is what we had 
to do.’ In terms of its temporal scales, a 
short- term event for a second- order body 
politic is an encounter of ﬁ rst- order bodies 
politic. In the mid- term, we see repeated 
patterns of such encoun ters or subjec ti ﬁ c a-
tion prac tices, and in the long term, we see 
the becom ing- custom of such prac tices, 
their deep social embed ding. 
 See also Alienation; 
Body Without 
Organs; Geopolitics; Posthuman Rights; 
Posthuman Disability and DisHuman 
Studies; Trans- corpor eal ity. 
 John Protevi 
 BODY WITHOUT ORGANS  
 In ‘To Have Done with the Judgement 
of God’, a radio play broad cast on
BODY WITHOUT ORGANS 
( Pisters 2014 ). 
 More speciﬁ c ally, based on these 
trans versal exten sions, the body without 
organs can also be product ive in the 
context of the tech no sphere. In her book 
 How We Became Posthuman , Hayles 
discusses how the model of the human 
since the Enlightenment has been subjec-
ted to alien a tion by cyber netic machines 
and arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence. Hayles brings 
together both scientiﬁ c theor ies and 
ﬁ ctional narrat ives of liter at ure that equally 
construct ideas about the posthu man in 
the computer age. She discov ers two 
tend en cies. On the one hand, there is an 
apoca lyptic narrat ive that indic ates the fear 
of the loss of human ity, loss of control and 
the dissol u tion of the human self. Th ese are 
the stories where tech no logy is conceived 
as separ ate from the human body: ‘Only 
if one thinks of the subject as an autonom-
ous self, inde pend ent of the envir on ment, 
is one likely to exper i ence the panic 
performed by Norbert Wiener’s  Cybernetics 
and Bernard Wolfe’s  Limbo ( Hayles 1999 : 
290). On the other hand, Hayles emphas-
izes (scientiﬁ c and imagin ary) stories that 
propose a contrast ing vision of the human 
in rela tion to the contem por ary techno- 
world: ‘When the human is seen as part of 
a distrib uted system.  . . it is not a ques tion 
of leaving the body behind but rather of 
extend ing embod ied aware ness in highly 
speciﬁ c, local and mater ial ways that would 
be impossible without elec tronic pros-
thesis’ (290–1). 
 Hayles’ concep tion of the posthu man is 
expli citly related to the artic u la tion of the 
human with intel li gent machines. However, 
by disen tangling certain assump tions 
about the human conceived as an inde-
pend ent entity, she opens up possib il it ies 
for the posthu man to survive in close 
circuits with other life forms, human, 
other wise embod ied and inor ganic, that 
strategies against the strat i fy ing regimes of 
the socially accep ted body, start ing with a 
call for doses of caution: the anor ectic 
body, the masochist body, the addicted 
body, the para noid body – they are all 
bodies without organs that demon strate 
that such resist ing strategies are not 
without danger and can turn out to be 
deadly. But there are no preset rules, except 
to be watch ful and wise, acknow ledging at 
the same time our fragil ity and need for 
freedom and the creation of new possib il-
it ies for life. 
 Th e body without organs is the sub- 
personal, not- yet-organized level of aﬀ ect-
ive qual it ies that allows new percep tions, 
new connec tions and new aﬀ ects. Because 
it dives below the categor ies and codes, the 
body without organs can make cross- 
cutting connec tions between the human 
and the non- human: mater i ally on the 
level of the combin a tion of human and 
animal  DNA , or on the aﬀ ect ive level of 
the prox im ity in move ment (speed and 
slow ness) in processes of becom ing- 
animal (e.g. prowl ing as in a becom ing- 
cat). So a second way of under stand ing the 
body without organs goes beyond the 
concept of the human body alto gether, 
when trans versal rela tions between species 
emerge. Th irdly, even further, the non- 
organic itself can be considered a body 
without organs. Th e earth is a body without 
organs, full of vibrant matter ( Bennett 
2010 ). Most funda ment ally, metal is a body 
without organs. Metal elements can be 
found in all human, animal and inor ganic 
matter. In its prim or dial and trans form at-
ive quality, metal is even the prime 
conductor of all matter, indic at ing an 
imman ent power of corpor eal ity in all 
matter ( Deleuze and Guattari 1980 : 411). 
Th ese in- human and inhuman exten sions 
of the body, beneath the organs and 
beyond human corpor eal ity and into the 
geology of the earth, make the body
to all other entit ies on the earth, the body 
without organs proposes indeed that we 
have always been posthu man. 
 See 
also 
Alienation; 
 AI 
(Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence); Earth; In-Human the; In/
Human; Contemporary, the; Otherwise 
Embodied Others. 
 Patricia Pisters 
we depend on. Th e body without organs 
suggests that we did not have to wait for 
pros thetic machines, exten sions of men by 
tech no logy, to under stand that the ‘scram-
bling of the codes’ is ﬁ rst and for all 
connec ted to a desire and funda mental 
need to deliver our auto matic reac tions 
and habitual self- contained forms of 
subjectiv ity. In acknow ledging our deep 
and ever- chan ging trans versal connec tions
century, includ ing ‘how camp spaces are 
currently discussed, imaged and construc-
ted’ (2009: 2). 
 Central to any discus sion, imagin ing 
and construc tion of the camp is a notion of 
human ity that rests on the possib il ity of 
contain ing the inhuman. Speciﬁ cally, we 
have to ask  who are the resid ents of camps, 
 who constructs the camp and  how are its 
resid ents, and the camp itself, imagined? Is 
it possible to reima gine the space of the 
camp in the name of  other histor ies – 
Romani histor ies, for one, and histor ies of 
encamp ment that can be posited as 
critique, as future, as possib il ity? If the 
Paris Commune was a form of encamp-
ment, and we take seri ously the polit ical 
prac tices of the Romani camp, how do we 
then under stand the states of excep tion 
that mark the concen tra tion camp and the 
refugee camp? Th ese multiple, contra dict-
ory mean ings and prac tices of the camp 
are construc ted through and formed by 
categor ies and notions of in/human ity. 
I would push us to take these ques tions 
seri ously – to claim this continuum of 
mean ings – as we enter into a consid er a-
tion of the polit ics and prac tices of the 
posthu man. 
 In order to under stand the camp as a 
tempor ary space, marked, at the same time, 
as a ﬁ gur at ively perman ent constitutive 
outside, we come to the deﬁ n i tion of the 
camp put forth by Giorgio Agamben in 
 Homo Sacer , as the  nomos of the modern. 
Agamben argues: 
 C 
 CAMP  
 Th e notion of the camp presents both 
some resid ual human ist features and 
distinct posthu man elements. It raises 
imper at ively the ques tion of the rela tion-
ship between posthu man ism and the 
inhuman aspects of the contem por ary 
world order. Th e origins of the word ‘camp’, 
accord ing to the  Oxford English Dictionary 
( OED ) (1989: 809), are milit ary, and the 
ﬁ rst deﬁ n i tion is ‘Martial contest, combat, 
ﬁ ght, battle, war’. Th e idea of camp as a site 
of battle is one that I want to keep constant, 
precisely because I see the camp as a site of 
critique, resist ance, oppos i tion and, in the 
end, combat. 
 Th e  OED has more than two pages 
deﬁ n ing camp, begin ning with the milit ary 
and trans fer ring to ‘the tempor ary quar-
ters, formed by tents, vehicles or other 
port able, impro vised means of shelter, 
occu pied by a body of nomads or men on 
the march, by trav el lers, gipsies [ sic ], 
compan ies of sports man, lumber man, 
ﬁ eld- preach ers and their audi ences, or 
parties “camping out”; an encamp ment.’ By 
the twen ti eth century, such ‘tempor ary 
quar ters’ included ‘quar ters for the accom-
mod a tion for detained or interned persons, 
as in  concen tra tion camp ’. As Charlie Haley 
has argued, ‘deﬁ n ing the camp is a central 
problem of our contem por ary moment’ 
(2009: 1), and he has metic u lously worked 
to docu ment the spaces and ideas of the 
camp at the begin ning of the twenty- ﬁ rst
and signi ﬁ c a tions, from the milit ary to the 
tempor ary to the site of intern ment or 
concen tra tion, from prac tices of leisure 
and holiday to those of bodily or aﬀ ect ive 
excess. In this way, the state of excep tion 
produced by the camp can be seen, also, as 
a site of possib il ity, where the camp and 
prac tices of encamp ment can be taken up 
as critique, as resist ance, as oppos i tion, as 
polit ics and as archive. Hannah Arendt, in 
‘We Refugees’, claims the refugee as the 
agent of a new polit ical posi tion, arguing: 
‘refugees driven from country to country 
repres ent the vanguard of their peoples – if 
they keep their iden tity’ (1943: 119). 
Arendt’s argu ment in that last clause ‘if 
they keep their iden tity’ was a call to claim 
refugee status; the status, as she says earlier 
in the essay, of the ‘so- called  schnor rer ’, or 
beggar, as a call to solid ar ity and a new 
under stand ing of belong ing, rather than 
ﬁ ght ing ‘like madmen for private exist-
ences and indi vidual destinies’ (114). 
 In the current moment, it is crucial that 
we claim the camp – from the  lager to the 
refugee camp, from the Romani encamp-
ment to the mahala, from the slum to the 
tower block. Such claim ing can be the 
basis for a new polit ics, one that takes 
seri ously the connec tions and intimacies 
that make up the human and non- human; 
the rela tion of human to animal, to mater ial 
objects and product ive prac tices, to the 
Commons and the larger world. Claiming 
the camp means taking up a polit ical 
economy that is not based on the Lockean 
ﬁ du ciary trust, on owner ship and enclos-
ure. Rather, we can take up new ques tions of 
tempor al ity and tempor ar i ness, useful ness 
and prac tice, common space and common 
sites, community form a tions and serious 
engage ments with (gendered, racial ized, 
classed, sexual, embod ied) diﬀ er ence. 
 Claiming the camp for me, as a Romani 
woman, means, on the one hand, claim ing 
  But what is ﬁ rst of all taken into the 
juridical order is the state of excep tion 
itself. Insofar as the state of excep tion is 
‘willed’, it inaug ur ates a new juridico- 
polit ical paradigm in which the norm 
becomes indis tin guish able from the 
excep tion. Th e camp is thus the struc ture 
in which the state of excep tion – the 
possib il ity of decid ing on which founds 
sover eign power – is real ized normally. 
 1998: 96–7 
 Th is new juridico- polit ical paradigm has 
been produced through the concen tra tion 
camp, the refugee camp, the migrant camp, 
the Romani camp and the prison camp at 
Guantánamo Bay, which itself has existed 
as a space of excep tion created in the wake 
of the War of 1898 – a  US Naval Base on 
Cuban soil – and in its subsequent iter a-
tions as a contain ment camp for Haitians in 
the 1990s and an extra ter rit orial, extraju di-
cial prison in the wake of 9/11. Camps have 
not simply been produced and main tained 
as states of excep tion, they have grown and 
spread glob ally. Camps exist in cities and 
spaces from Kenya to Calais, from Dhaka to 
Turkey, and from Jordan to Chennai. Recent 
history has seen Second World War- era 
concen tra tion camps, former mass murder 
sites – includ ing Dachau in Germany and 
Sajmište in Serbia – turned into refugee 
camps. Th us the state of excep tion has 
achieved spatial domin ance, with large 
areas of the world main tain ing sover eign 
states of excep tion for the  longue- durée , as 
sites of death and of what Agamben has 
called ‘bare life’. Camps, spread across 
Europe, Africa, the Americas and Asia, have 
repro duced the state of excep tion on such 
a large scale that, we could argue, necro pol-
it ics, as conceived by Achille Mbembe 
( 2003 ), has, in fact, triumphed over biopol-
it ics to become the domin ant product ive 
machinery of sover eignty. 
 Th e space of encamp ment, and the 
meaning of the camp, has also been a site
CAPITALOCENE AND CHTHULUCENE 
empire; I argue that we cannot take up the 
idea of a plan et ary human ism without 
claim ing the camp and its multiple legacies, 
its prob lem at ics and its inhab it ants. 
Furthermore, the camp moves beyond the 
indi vidual and the collect ive, moves 
beyond the human, as the subject of the 
polit ical. Th e camp incor por ates history 
and archive, space and nature, protest, 
resist ance and critique. It incor por ates 
traject or ies of evic tion and expul sion, 
collat eral damage and ﬂ ight; it takes up 
new forms of tempor al ity and can posit 
new claims against capital, sover eignty, the 
nation- state and regimes of citizen ship. It 
is Zuccotti Park, certainly, but also Geneva 
Camp in the centre of Dhaka and the 
Jungle in Calais; by claim ing the camp as 
protest and as the constitutive outside of 
the city, we can open up space for other 
polit ics, for other subjects, for other histor-
ies and other futures. 
 See also Expulsions; In/Human; In- 
human; 
Necropolitics; 
Lampedusa; 
Occupy (aft er Deleuze); (Un)Documented 
Citizenship; Nomadic Sensibility. 
 Ethel Brooks 
 CAPITALOCENE AND 
CHTHULUCENE  
 We are not posthu man; we are compost. 
We are not homo; we are humus. We are 
terran; we are earth lings; we are many; we 
are inde term in ate. We bleed into each 
other in chaotic ﬂ uid extra vag ance. We eat 
our own snakey tails in sympoi etic whorls 
to gener ate poly morphic ongo ing ness; we 
are enmeshed with the ouroboroi of 
diverse inter laced neth er worlds. We are 
chthonic, of and for the earth, of and for its 
unﬁ n ished times. We live and die in its 
ruins. We tunnel in the ruins to germin ate 
the geno cide against Roma and Sinti, 
claim ing our exist ence in the  lagers , the 
exterm in a tion camps set up by the Nazis 
and their allies to destroy our people and 
our history. It means coming to a recog ni-
tion of that history, of those who were 
murdered and those who survived, and of 
the gener a tions who have come aft er, still 
marked by the loss of our people, our 
history, our place in the world. On the 
other hand, it means taking the Romani 
camp – in its old and new form a tions – as 
one of the means of our survival and one 
of the possib il it ies of our dignity, our 
diﬀ er ence, our polit ics and our community, 
that has been the site of our archive and 
our history. Elsewhere, I have written 
about the camp as a living thing, as the site 
of decol on iz a tion; it can only become such 
if we claim it as our history, our archive, 
our living present ( Brooks 2013 : 2). 
 Again, we can draw from Agamben, but 
this time to take up the camp as possib il ity, 
as the site of another polit ics: 
  It is even possible that, if we want to be 
equal to the abso lutely new tasks ahead, 
we will have to abandon decidedly, 
without reser va tion, the funda mental 
concepts through which we have so far 
repres en ted the subjects of the polit ical 
(Man, the Citizen and its rights, but also 
the sover eign people, the worker, and so 
forth) and build our polit ical philo sophy 
anew start ing from the one and only 
ﬁ gure of the refugee. 
 Agamben 2000 : 16.7 
 Th is concep tion of the refugee is one basis 
upon which we can build a new polit ical 
philo sophy, but, for me, it is the idea of the 
camp that opens up new polit ical possib il-
ity. Paul Gilroy ( 2004 : 16) argues for a 
‘plan et ary human ism’ based on ideas of 
decol on iz a tion put forth by Fanon and 
Césaire, and asks us to move beyond the 
‘camps’ of race, the nation- state and
to think with. Moore himself ﬁ rst heard 
the term ‘Capitalocene’ in 2009 in a seminar 
in Lund, Sweden, when then gradu ate 
student Andreas Malm proposed it. In an 
urgent histor ical conjunc ture, words- to-
think- with pop out all at once from many 
bubbling cauldrons because we all feel the 
need for better netbags to collect up the 
stuﬀ  crying out for atten tion. 4   
 However, 
the 
Anthropocene 
or 
Capitalocene are perhaps really more 
bound ary events than epochs, like the 
K-Pg bound ary between the Cretaceous 
and the Paleogene. 5 Th e Anthropocene 
and Capitalocene mark severe discon tinu-
it ies; what comes aft er will not be like what 
came before. Th e scale of destruc tion 
wreaked in the Anthropocene, in the 
Capitalocene, has consequences. Th ere will 
be no  status quo ante . Loss is real and 
ongoing. Mourning is required, and it is 
and will be hard. Th e bound ary that is the 
Anthropocene/Capitalocene means many 
things, includ ing that immense, irre vers-
ible and unequally borne destruc tion is 
really in train, not only for the eleven 
billion or so people who will be on earth 
near the end of the twenty- ﬁ rst century, 
but for myriads of other crit ters too. (Th e 
incom pre hens ible but sober number of 
around eleven billion people will only hold 
if current world wide birth rates of human 
babies remain low; if they rise again, all 
bets are oﬀ . Anti- racist, anti- imper i al ist 
femin ists stopped talking about this; 
shame on us.) Th e edge of extinc tion is not 
just a meta phor; system collapse is not a 
thriller. Ask any refugee of any species. 
Our job is to make the Anthropocene and 
Capitalocene as short and thin as possible 
and to cultiv ate with each other in every 
way imagin able epochs to come that can 
replen ish refuge. 6 
 
 Right now, the earth is full of refugees, 
human and not, without refuge. 
 
in the seams. We can yet be resur gent. 
Th ere may still be time. Composting is so 
hot. 1 
 Th e outrages merit ing names like 
Anthropocene or Capitalocene are about 
socio- ecolo gic ally, 
histor ic ally 
situ ated 
human beings (not human kind all the time 
every where) destroy ing places and times 
of refuge for people and other crit ters. 
Th e Anthropocene and the Capitalocene 
desig nate double death, the killing of the 
condi tions of ongo ing ness. 2 Th ese are 
appro pri ately ugly names for unpre ced-
entedly destruct ive webs of systemic 
processes. Th eir consequences, their mater-
i al it ies, are already etched into the rocks, 
airs, waters and ﬂ esh of terrans, in chem ical 
and nuclear signa tures, in heat- trap ping 
gasses, in hot acid seas. Capitalocene is one 
of those neces sary but insuﬃ   cient words 
that pop into one’s mouth unbid den. 
Unhappy with the false and arrog ant 
human ist univer sal ism of Anthropocene, I 
started lectur ing about the histor ical 
extrac tion ism and extinc tion ism of the 
Capitalocene (and of the Plantationocene, 
that name for processes for making wealth 
through radical simpli ﬁ c a tion, rooted in 
global trans port a tions of peoples, plants, 
animals and microbes and in slavery, colo-
ni al ism, 
hetero- norm at ive 
famili al ism, 
racism and other forced systems of produc-
tion and repro duc tion, all of which made 
the great accel er a tions of the Capitalocene 
possible). 3 But no one invents terms like 
Capitalocene  de novo ; notice how many 
people propose similar import ant terms 
at the same time. We lust for names to 
desig nate a shared, intol er able and ﬂ atly 
unne ces sary condi tion. Th e estab lished dis-
 order is not neces sary; how many times 
and in how many ways must we learn 
to notice this fact? Not only was ‘my’ 
Capitalocene part of a cat’s cradle game of 
inven tion, as always, but Jason Moore had 
already developed compel ling argu ments
CAPITALOCENE AND CHTHULUCENE 
chthonic ones. Th e scan dals of times called 
the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene 
are the latest and most danger ous of these 
exterm in at ing forces, these Singularities 
dealing out double death. Living- with and 
dying- with each other potently in the 
Chthulucene can be a ﬁ erce reply to the 
dictates of both Anthropos and Capital in 
the exterm in a tion ist times of the Moderns. 
It turns out that the chthonic ones are not 
dead; they writhe and slither within all of 
earth. Like Medusa, they are mortal and on 
the move. Like the octopuses, squid and 
cuttle ﬁ sh appre ci ated in ﬁ ft h- century  BCE 
Greece, the chthonic ones are crit ters of 
aporia. Th ey secrete inky darkest night; 
they are artis ans of disguise; they are 
relent lessly poly morphic; they entangle the 
world in their numer ous tube- feet-lined, 
stinger- endowed tentacles. 7 Th e chthonic 
ones are spiders of the sea; they are pred at-
ors; they are not exterm in at ors. 
 We need a name for the dynamic 
ongoing sym- chthonic forces and powers 
of which people as humus are a part, within 
which ongo ing ness is at stake. Ongoingness 
is not futur ism; ongo ing ness is full of 
continu it ies, discon tinu it ies and surprises. 
Maybe, but only maybe, and only with 
intense commit ment and collab or at ive 
work and play with other earth lings, ﬂ our-
ish ing for rich multis pe cies assemblages 
that include human people will be possible. 
I am calling all this the Chthulucene – past, 
present and to come. Th ese real and 
possible timespaces are not named aft er  SF 
writer H. P. Lovecraft ’s miso gyn ist racial- 
night mare monster Cthulhu (note the 
spelling diﬀ er ence), but rather aft er the 
diverse earth- wide tentacu lar powers and 
forces and collec ted things with names like 
Naga, Gaia, Tangaroa (burst from water- 
full Papa), Terra, Haniyasu- hime, Spider 
Woman, Pachamama, Oya, Gorgo, Raven, 
A’akuluujjusi and many many more. ‘My’ 
 ‘Chthulucene’ is a simple word. It is a 
compound of two Greek roots ( khthôn and 
 kainos ) that together name a kind of time-
place for learn ing to stay with the trouble 
of living and dying in response- ability on 
a damaged earth. Kainos means now, a 
time of begin nings, a time for ongoing, 
for fresh ness. Nothing in kainos must 
mean conven tional pasts, presents or 
futures. Th ick times have many shapes; 
arrows entangle, double back on them-
selves, prolif er ate and lead astray; times are 
bump tious mater i al it ies. Besides all that, 
there is nothing in times of begin nings 
that insists on wiping out what has come 
before, or, indeed, wiping out what comes 
aft er. Kainos can be full of inher it ances, 
of remem ber ing, and full of comings, of 
nurtur ing what might still be, as well as 
noti cing what still is. Resonating in 
sympoi etic complex ity, kainos plucks the 
threads of thick, ongoing pres ence, with 
stringy hyphae infus ing all sorts of tempor-
al it ies and mater i al it ies. 
 Chthonic ones are beings of the earth, 
both 
ancient 
and 
up- to-the- minute. 
Chthonic ones are replete with tentacles, 
feelers, digits, cords, whip tails, spider legs 
and very unruly hair. Chthonic ones romp 
in multi- critter humus but have little 
patience 
with 
sky- gazing 
anthro pos. 
Chthonic ones are monsters in the best 
sense; they demon strate and perform the 
mater ial mean ing ful ness of earth processes 
and crit ters. Th ey also demon strate and 
perform consequences. Chthonic ones are 
not safe; they have no truck with ideo-
logues; they belong to no one; they writhe 
and luxuri ate in mani fold forms and mani-
fold names in all the airs, waters and places 
of earth. Th ey make and unmake; they are 
made and unmade. Th ey are who are; they 
are what are. Th ey do not do ‘I’ very well; 
they are sym- poietic, not auto- poietic. No 
wonder the world’s great mono the isms in 
both reli gious and secular guises have tried
systems from 1750 to the present. Like all 
such global aggreg ates, the data mask 
vast and diverse inequal it ies and also 
threaten to mystify the sympoi etic 
natural- tech nical processes for making 
such data, as well as making such 
inequal it ies and onto lo gical homo gen iz-
a tions. Still, the strik ing shared inﬂ ec tion 
points around 1950 of so many hetero-
gen eous expo nen tial growth curves 
(human popu la tion, species extinc tions, 
use of paper, carbon emis sions, metals 
extrac tion, indus trial animal produc tion, 
forced and free human migra tions, etc. 
etc.) cry out for situ ated histor ical 
analysis of webbed processes, and not for 
enthralled appeals to the math em at ics of 
expo nen tial growth curves as if they 
described natural laws and neces sary 
direc tions of time. 
 4. 
For his ﬁ rst widely avail able Capitalocene 
argu ment, see Jason Moore, ‘Anthropo-
cene, Capitalocene, and the Myth of 
Industrialization’, 
 https://jason w moore.
wordpress.com/2013/06/16/anthropo
cene- capitalocene-the- myth-of- 
industrial iz a tion/ , 16 June 2013, and ‘Th e 
Capitalocene, Part 1: On the Nature and 
Origins of Our Ecological Crisis’,  http://
www.jason w moore.com/uploads/The_
Capitalocene__Part_I__June_2014.pdf, 
2015 [accessed 15 March 2016].  
 5. Scott Gilbert pointed out that the 
Anthropocene (and Plantationocene) 
should be considered a bound ary event 
like the K-Pg bound ary, not an epoch. 
See Donna Haraway, Noboru Ishikawa, 
Scott F. Gilbert, Kenneth Olwig, Anna L. 
Tsing and Nils Bubandt, ‘Anthropologists 
Are Talking – About the Anthropocene’, 
 Ethnos , 81(4): 1–30, 2015. As far as I 
know, this conver sa tion is the ﬁ rst place 
the term Plantationocene appeared 
(p. 22). 
 6. Refuge and resur gence are developed in 
Anna Tsing,  Th e Mushroom at the End of 
Chthulucene, even burdened with its prob-
lem atic 
Greek- ish 
tendrils, 
entangles 
myriad tempor al it ies and spati al it ies and 
myriad intra- active entit ies- in-assemblages 
– includ ing the more- than-human, other- 
than-human, inhuman and human- as-
humus. Even rendered in an American 
English- language text like this one, Naga, 
Gaia, Tangaroa, Medusa, Spider Woman 
and all their kin are some of the many 
thou sand names proper to a vein of  SF that 
Lovecraft  could not have imagined or 
embraced – namely the webs of spec u lat ive 
fabu la tion, spec u lat ive femin ism, science 
ﬁ ction and scientiﬁ c fact, so far. 8   
 We need ugly words like Anthropocene 
and Capitalocene to do needed critique; 
we need the snakey no- name/thou sand- 
name ones for actual living and dying as 
earth lings. It matters which stories tell 
stories, which concepts think concepts. 
Mathematically, visu ally and narrat ively, it 
matters which ﬁ gures ﬁ gure ﬁ gures, which 
systems system at ize systems. 9 
 See 
also 
Anthropocene; 
Epigenetic 
Landscape; Expulsions; Extinction; Gulf 
Labor; Kin; Vibrant Matter; Survival; 
Posthuman Critical Th eory.
COMMONS, THE 
under stood as one such concept, as a 
some thing – rela tion, aﬀ ect, space, time, 
lack – that is shared by all, used by all, and 
accounts for all things in/of/on the 
common(s). Th e commons is a constant 
emer gence of common social, economic 
and envir on mental rela tions and prac tices. 
Th ey are spaces of exper i ment a tion, for 
both theor iz ing and prac tising, provid ing a 
lens for critique and aﬃ  rm a tion, a method 
for resist ance and creation. Th ey might be 
purely aﬀ ect ive, tethered to a speciﬁ c loca-
tion, or an unpre dict able entangling of 
both. Perhaps they are a riot, a party, a free 
space, an invis ible space, a non- space, a 
common place. Th e inter pret a tion of the 
commons as such ﬁ nds further support in 
Deleuze’s explic a tion of philo soph ical 
produc tion; he clari ﬁ es that while some 
concepts require special ized, extraordin-
ary or aﬀ ect ively charged words, ‘others 
make do with an ordin ary, every day word 
that is ﬁ lled with harmon ics so distant that 
it risks being imper cept ible to a nonphilo-
soph ical ear’ ( Deleuze 1994 : 7–8). Suﬃ  ce 
to say, it would be hard to ﬁ nd a more 
appar ently mundane word that ‘common’, 
yet this simpli city belies the contra dict ory, 
complex, 
multiple 
and 
ever- evolving 
praxes that denote the commons of the 
past and present. 
 Th e commons of advanced capit al ism 
are myriad, multiple, contra dict ory and, at 
times, imper cept ible. Th ey have taken 
shape as digital ( Terranova 2004 ), cultural 
( Lessig 2002 ), intel lec tual ( Moten and 
Harney 2013 ), aesthetic ( Moten 2003 ), 
histor ical ( Linebaugh 2014 ), envir on-
mental ( Shiva 1997 ), domestic ( Federici 
2012 ) and urban ( Harvey 2012 ) commons. 
As a prac tice of communal manage ment of 
resource access, the commons determ ines 
trans versal rela tions between all living 
beings and their common envir on ment. 
With thou sands of years of prac tical know-
ledge, the concept of the commons can 
the World: On the Possibility of Life in 
Capitalist Ruins (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2015). 
 7. Marcel 
Detienne 
and 
Jean-Pierre 
Vernant,  Les ruses de l’intelligence: la 
mètis des Grecs (Paris: Flammarion et 
Cie, 1974). Th e Titan goddess Metis is of 
an earlier, more tangled age than Zeus 
and his siblings. Despite eﬀ orts to build 
her into Olympiad gene a lo gies by marry-
ing her to Zeus, in my stories of the 
Chthulucene, Metis remains true to her 
earth- wide tentacu lar kin. 
  8. Os Mil Nomes de Gaia/the Th ousand 
Names of Gaia was the gener at ive inter-
na tional 
confer ence 
organ ized 
by 
Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, Déborah 
Danowski and their collab or at ors in 
2014 in Rio de Janeiro. See Haraway, 
‘Entrevista,’ by Skype, 21 August 2014, 
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
1x0ox UHO lA8 . For all the videos from 
Th e Th ousand Names of Gaia/Os Mil 
Nomes, see  https://www.youtube.com/c/
osmil nomes de gaia/videos [accessed 17 
December 2015]. 
 9. Th is gloss ary entry relies heavily on 
Donna J. Haraway,  Staying with the 
Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene 
(Durham,  NC : Duke University Press 
Books, 2016). 
 Donna Haraway 
 COMMONS, THE  
 In  What is Philosophy? Deleuze and 
Guattari argue a philo soph ical praxis 
based on the produc tion of concepts. Such 
concepts, they contend, are inter twined 
with the prob lem atic forces they are 
created to address, ‘without which they 
would have no meaning and which can 
them selves only be isol ated or under stood 
as their solu tion emerges’ ( Deleuze and 
Guattari 1994 : 16). Th e commons can be
COMMONS, THE
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
study of the commons, exem pli ﬁ ed in the 
work of Silvia Federici ( 2004 ,  2012 ), Peter 
Linebaugh ( 2014 ) and Maria Mies ( 1998 ), 
points to the commons, or rather their 
privat iz a tion and destruc tion, as a key 
point in the devel op ment of modern 
capit al ism, patri archy and colo ni al ism. 
Likewise, a survey of femin ist economic 
and geographic studies reveals that forms 
of common resource manage ment have 
success fully persisted at the heart of many 
communit ies, espe cially through out the 
global South, albeit requir ing ongoing 
struggle against colo ni al ism, neoco lo ni al-
ism and multi- national exploit a tion ( Shiva 
1997 ;  Ostrom 1990 ). Th is work has shown 
that ‘common ing’ is the prin ciple by which 
human beings have organ ized their exist-
ence on this earth for thou sands of years, 
and that ‘there is hardly a society that does 
not have the commons at its heart’ 
( Caﬀ entzis and Federici 2014 ). Yet these 
approaches to the commons focus primar-
ily on mater ial or phys ical commons – the 
land, natural resources, ﬁ sh er ies, the ocean, 
the air. Here, the rela tions that consti tute 
the common are groun ded in phys ical 
loca tions, embed ded in a common earthly 
territ ory, and oft en come with pre- formed 
struc tures and insti tu tions to manage 
common resources. While such common-
ing touches the ecolo gical agency and 
rela tions of posthu man ethics, the continu-
ation of basic anthro po centric ideals – wage 
rela tion, social insti tu tions, estab lished 
forms of governance – inev it ably stymie 
the real iz a tion of a posthu man commons 
that is an imman ent, embod ied and every-
day prac tice ( Papadopoulos 2012 ). 
 Th e commons as method of tracing 
codes, ﬂ ows and poten tial ‘lines of ﬂ ight’ 
is also addressed in the (post) opera ismo -
inspired work of Antonio Negri, Michael 
Hardt, Cesare Casarino, Paolo Virno and 
Matteo Pasquinelli. Here, too, the concept 
of common ing embod ies a rela tional, 
easily trans verse entrenched dicho tom ies 
of nature–culture, human–non- human 
and indi vidual–collectiv ity, relying on self- 
organ iz ing and process- based form a tions 
to ﬁ nd points of rela tion al ity to enact 
becom ing- in-common. As a prac tice, 
common ing might also regu late the 
produc tion and dissem in a tion of imma-
ter ial resources, like know ledge, culture 
and commu nic a tion. Th e commons as a 
polit ical praxis may operate based on 
capit al ist, 
anti- capit al ist 
or 
sharing 
economic lines ( Caﬀ entzis and Federici 
2014 ;  Gibson-Graham 2006 ). Th ey can be 
glob al ized, local ized, ‘glocal’, as immense as 
our galaxy or as speciﬁ c ally and minutely 
singu lar as the sustain able ecology of a 
three- toed sloth. A commons might 
manage resources that are ﬁ nite, as is the 
case with natural resources, or impossibly 
inﬁ n ite, as is the case for know ledge and 
cultural commons. 
 With this complex ity, multi pli city and 
constant state of becom ing, the commons 
of the anthro po cene present an ideal 
concep tual terrain to exper i ment with an 
actu al ized 
posthu man 
ethico- polit ics. 
Such a posthu man commons would extend 
the dictum  omnia sunt communia to its 
vital ist mater i al ist horizon, the inclu sion of 
all forms of life and account able to, not 
subsumed by, aﬀ ect ive and imma ter ial 
rela tions. Th ese moves, follow ing Rosi 
Braidotti, might inspire ‘an ethics based on 
the primacy of the rela tion, of inter de-
pend ence, which values non- human or a- 
personal Life’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 95). Towards 
activ at ing this posthu man ethics being- in-
common, it is neces sary to identify the 
salient and gener at ive common al it ies of 
exist ing mani fest a tions of the commons 
and common ing. 
 As abiding ﬁ nan cial, social and ecolo-
gical crises rever ber ate across the globe, 
the commons have made a resur gence as a 
prom ising line of ﬂ ight. Th e histor ical
COMMONS, THE 
ques tion becomes to ﬁ nd the speciﬁ c, 
adequate, histor ical form through which 
it should determ ine itself’ ( Casarino and 
Negri 2008 : 104). Th is func tion of collect-
ive praxis under scores the ability of 
common ing prac tices to root out exist ing 
hier arch ical and anthro po centric rela tions. 
 While the invest ment in collect ive 
polit ical praxis itself may be inter preted as 
impli citly accept ing human superi or ity 
over the common, a more aﬃ  rm at ive 
reading of this collect ive praxis involves an 
inﬁ n ite multi pli city of non- human species, 
forces and entit ies, all of whom self-
 organ ize the repro duc tion of life and 
creation 
of 
trans versal 
subjectiv it ies 
through their imman ent and unpre dict-
able common rela tions. Rather than 
preclud ing all non- human matter and 
agen cies at the start, a posthu man collect-
ive praxis might help unveil the common 
nature of human ism in social life, freeing 
both polit ical prac tices and singu lar, 
bounded human ist subjectiv it ies towards 
unknow able possib il it ies. Casarino and 
Negri’s dual emphasis on explor ing the 
trans form at ive 
gestures 
of 
collect ive 
praxis, and on exper i ment ing with collect-
ive rela tions in search of an adequate form, 
estab lish ing a basic common al ity from 
which to stage the posthu man commons 
of the future. Th is commons is no longer 
limited to the mater ial (re)produc tion of 
life itself, but includes the produc tion of 
radical new modes of trans versal subjectiv-
it ies, gener at ive and inclus ive common ing 
rela tions, and wholly new ways of 
becom ing- in-common in and with the 
world (Read 2011). 
 Th e emer ging concep tion of a posthu-
man commons is that ‘ordin ary, every day 
word’ that has found ‘speciﬁ c, adequate, 
histor ical form(s)’ that live up to the 
needs and pres sures of our age. As a 
meld of cross- species/trans- mater ial social 
rela tions, ecolo gical embeded ness and 
subject- making process, which assists in 
chart ing the devel op ment of advanced 
capit al ism. Th is reading iden ti ﬁ es import-
ant shift s in labour, produc tion and accu-
mu la tion, all of which move towards 
imma ter ial rela tions and produc tion. Here, 
the concept of the multi tude replaces the 
commons, as ‘a form of polit ical exist ence 
that takes as its start ing point a One that is 
radic ally hetero gen eous to the State: public 
Intellect’ ( Virno 1996 : 201). Th e concept of 
the multi tude was popular ized through 
Hardt and Negri’s adapt a tion of it in their 
widely read  Empire  trilogy, which mapped 
the emer gence of imma ter ial capit al ist 
rela tions, partic u larly forms of imma ter ial 
labour, biopol it ical produc tion and glob al-
ized ﬁ nan cial systems ( Hardt and Negri 
2000 ,  2009 ). 
 While these innov a tions stretched the 
concept of the commons beyond the 
unfore seen hori zons of ﬁ nan cial, cognit ive 
and commu nic at ive capit al ism, their 
analysis did nothing to displace the cent-
ral ity of the human as ruler of the earthly 
commons. Th e praxis of a posthu man 
commons demands an ongoing commit-
ment to ﬂ esh ing out the web of lively and 
mech an ical inter con nec tions that remain 
unseen prior to the estab lish ment of a 
common rela tion ( Pasquinelli 2008 ). 
However, a posthu man common that 
criss- crosses the mater ial and imma ter ial, 
the organic and the tech no lo gical, can illu-
min ate the struc tures and rela tions of that 
support the domin ance of western human-
ism and tradi tional forms of governance 
( Papadopoulos 2010 ). Th rough their dialo-
gical explor a tion,  In Praise of the Common , 
Cesare Casarino and Negri consider the 
possib il it ies of ‘unveil ing’ wrought by 
collect ive praxis, or ‘the common nature of 
social life’. But even this gener at ive possib-
il ity of ‘unveil ing in and of itself is only half 
the story: as soon as such an unveil ing 
is about to take place, the funda mental
Th e twenty- ﬁ rst century has encountered 
a prolif er a tion of models. Models are 
conven tion ally considered as medi ations 
between a subject as the agent of obser -
va tion, 
and 
inde pend ently 
exist ing, 
external 
entit ies 
which 
become 
its 
object. Th is results in a human- bound, 
anthro po centric model, which is being 
chal lenged 
by 
current 
posthu man ist 
approaches. Th e shift  to a non- anthro po-
centric model is more than a mere 
decent ring of a subject’s posi tion. Th e 
focus is shift ed from the produc tion of a 
subject to the produc tion of subjectiv ity – 
the capa city to recip roc ally change with 
the envir on ment, and to aﬀ ect and be 
aﬀ ected in a rela tion ship of commut a tion 
( Deleuze 1988b : 124). As subjectiv ity is 
deﬁ ned by the capa city to change, it is not 
bound any more to the human realm and 
encom passes human and non- human 
entit ies, ﬂ at ten ing the onto lo gical ground. 
Quantum physics’ spatial models and 
Leibniz’s diﬀ er en tial calcu lus as elab or ated 
by Gilles Deleuze provide an altern at ive to 
discrete models of repres ent a tion and are 
in tune with the process onto logy of 
becom ing that grounds the posthu man 
turn. 
 Quantum physics provides a formal 
model to concep tu al ize an onto logy not 
based on repres ent a tion subor din ated 
to pre- deﬁ ned iden tit ies, but on a commut-
a tion of agents involved intra- actively 
in their emer gence. Th is epistem o lo gical 
model requires a discon tinu ity; a slicing 
through the continuum of reality where 
the agent of obser va tion and the agent 
observed are ‘co- consti tuted’ simul tan-
eously while space and time are enacted as 
products of this cut ( Barad 2007 : 139). In a 
similar manner, in Leibniz’s model of 
reality and percep tion, space and time 
cannot be considered  a priori but instead 
polit ical 
econom ics, 
the 
posthu man 
commons activ ates the aﬀ ect ive forces 
induced through the process of radical 
concept- making. With this renew ing well 
of energy, the force and live li ness of 
posthu man concep tions of the commons 
enable the multi plic a tion of imman ent and 
embod ied forms of trans form at ive prac-
tices and subjectiv it ies. In this, many exist-
ing commons can be viewed as already an 
expres sion of the posthu man polit ics to 
come, one that will continue to innov ate 
collect ive posthu man forms of rela tion al-
ity, subjectiv ity, and polit ical praxis ( Dyer-
Witheford 2006 ). Th ese char ac ter ist ics 
reson ate with femin ist Braidotti’s concep-
tu al iz a tion of ‘becom ing- posthu man:’ 
  a process of rede ﬁ n ing one’s sense of 
attach ment and connec tion to a shared 
world, a territ orial space: urban, social, 
psychic, ecolo gical, plan et ary as it may be. 
It expresses multiple ecolo gies of belong-
ing, while it enacts the trans form a tion of 
one’s sensorial and percep tual coordin-
ates, in order to acknow ledge the collect-
ive nature and outward- bound direc tion 
of what we still call the self.  
 Braidotti 2013 : 193 
 Common to both posthu man ism and the 
concept of the commons is a drive towards 
a more ethical mode of being- in-common, 
one which acknow ledges and aﬃ  rms the 
inter con nec ted, trans versal rela tions of all 
living matter. It is the radic ally trans versal 
and mater i al ist char ac ter of both that 
resound the trans form at ive possib il it ies of 
a posthu man polit ics that is adequate to 
the chal lenges of the Anthropocene. 
 See also  Feminist Posthumanities, Food; 
Occupy (aft er Deleuze); Political Aﬀ ect; 
Posthuman Rights; Stateless State; Survival; 
Organization in Platform Capitalism; P2P 
(Peer to Peer) Economies. 
 Lindsay Grace Weber
COMMUTATION ONTOLOGY 
Within Bohr’s conceptual framework, 
when the agential cut in the continuum of 
reality is enacted, that is the moment of a 
measurement could be described as clear 
but not distinct. Th is moment is clear 
insofar as rela tions can be drawn, space–
time–matter is made speciﬁ c, and an 
epistem o lo gical distinc tion between the 
object and the agency of the obser va tion is 
estab lished. However, the moment of the 
agen tial cut is not distinct insofar as it is 
onto lo gic ally insep ar able from the continu-
ity of the world. Th e causal struc ture of 
both models neither follows a ﬁ xed traject-
ory nor is completely left  to chance. In the 
quantum model, determ in ism is avoided 
through the mech an ism of the agen tial cut 
which intra- actively fore grounds certain 
exclu sions and there fore opens up a poten-
ti al ity that would be other wise closed-oﬀ  
in a deter m in istic sequen tial causal struc-
ture ( Barad 2007 : 179–82). Th e model does 
not entail a preformed matrix of possib il it-
ies that a pre- traced path will actu al ize. Th e 
non- arbit rar i ness of the model lies in the 
fact that new exclu sions and inclu sions are 
enacted in every intra- action, there fore 
recon ﬁ g ur ing any possib il it ies. 
 Following 
Barad’s 
‘ethico- onto-
epistemology’ ( Barad 2007 : 185), a non- 
sequen tial co- consti tu tion of cause and 
eﬀ ect simul tan eously emerges on each side 
of the agen tial cut. Humanist ethics, based 
on the human subject as the locus of 
respons ib il ity, require a repres ent a tion of 
the ‘other’. Th is condi tion of onto lo gical 
separ ab il ity is prob lem at ized by models 
based on entan gle ment (quantum physics) 
and the milieu (Deleuze’s model) as they 
co- consti tute cause and eﬀ ect, space, time 
and agency and they acknow ledge no prior 
separ ab il ity between the terms. Th e spati al ity 
of this ethical model makes the anthro po-
centric temporal causal struc tures redund-
ant and sets up a topo lo gical ground ing for 
new ethical models. In the same way that 
are co- consti tuted ‘genet ic ally . . . in the 
ensemble of the diﬀ er en tial rela tion 
in the subject’ ( Smith 2012 : 55). Th e calcu-
lus model has been gener ally criti cized 
for distin guish ing between the continu ity 
of space–time and the discrete ness of a 
matter that is pre- formed and given. In the 
above model, the present would proceed 
from the past in a determ in istic manner 
and would lead to the future within a 
smooth, continu ous fully deﬁ n able move-
ment. However, in Leibniz’s diﬀ er en tial 
calcu lus model, the object and subject as 
well as the time and space are all the result 
of the diﬀ er en tial rela tion: they are its 
products. Th e rela tion is external to the 
relata; in a way that it precedes and 
consti tutes them, deﬁ n ing what Deleuze 
would term as ‘diﬀ er ence- in-itself’ ( Smith 
2012 : 53). 
 In both the quantum and the diﬀ er en-
tial model, there are no pre- exist ent entit-
ies to be empir ic ally discovered by the 
subject but rather any temporal and spatial 
rela tions are contin gent on how the cut has 
been enacted on the rela tion ship of 
commut a tion. Th e basis for this commut a-
tion brings forward the insepar ab il ity of 
the objects and the ‘agen cies of obser va-
tions’ ( Barad 2007 : 114). 
 Th e result of this insepar ab il ity was 
observed by Niels Bohr as he could only 
measure the values of objects that parti cip-
ated in the exper i ment, as framed by the 
appar atus. His conclu sion that ‘obser va-
tion- inde pend ent objects do not possess 
well- deﬁ ned inher ent prop er ties’ ( Barad 
2007 : 196) ﬁ nds reson ances with the irre-
du cib il ity of the prin ciples of ‘clear and 
distinct’ developed by Descartes and refor-
mu lated by Leibniz. Leibniz envi sioned 
that ‘conscious percep tions [of the subject/
obser v ant] are neces sar ily clear but 
confused (not distinct), while uncon scious 
percep tions (Ideas) are distinct but neces-
sar ily obscure (not clear)’ ( Smith 2012 : 55).
the task of break ing down has been super-
seded by the func tion of elab or a tion for 
which auto mated machines learn from 
data by estab lish ing infer en tial rela tions 
between facial images and names, or voice 
frequency and patterns. Th e speed of 
correl a tion between inde pend ent chunks 
of data corres ponds to algorithmic func-
tions of elab or a tion for which this and that 
kind of inform a tion become infer en tially 
processed, elab or ated upon through the 
linear and non- linear logic of implic a-
tion for which a general rule or truth 
can be determ ined. With the devel op-
ment of arti ﬁ  cial neural networks and 
the method of machine learn ing, the turn 
to compu ta tion means the emer gence 
of auto mated systems of know ledge 
(see  AI ). 
 Th e idea of auto mated know ledge, 
however, is not new and needs to be histor-
ic ally mapped back to the very inven tion 
of the alpha betic atom iz a tion of language. 
With the discret iz a tion of the continu ity 
and local ity of speech, the alpha bet already 
deﬁ ned a compu ta tional order of commu ni-
c a tion that estab lished gram mat ical rules 
and a syntactical arrange ment of letters 
that could contain inﬁ n ite quant it ies of 
meaning. Despite the argu ment that com-
pu ta tional func tions are present in nature 
(i.e. the idea of a pan- compu ta tional 
universe), one cannot over look how the 
histor ical inven tion of formal language 
rather expressed the compu ta tional func-
tion of break ing know ledge into bits but 
also re- assem bling bits to trans mit, store 
and commu nic ate meaning. As long ago as 
the early 1700s, Gottfried Leibniz imagined 
a univer sal formal language able to express 
scientiﬁ c and meta phys ical concepts. His 
idea of  char ac ter ist ica univer salis consti-
tuted the basis of the alpha bet of human 
thought working as a discrete machine 
that could deliver ideas and things directly. 
an entan gle ment refuses prior distinc tions 
and pre- exist ing entit ies, a posthu man 
ethical model denies the split between the 
human and non- human. Instead, it rethinks 
the two terms as entan gle ments of each 
other with the bound ar ies that can be 
drawn between them as purely contin gent 
on the epistem o lo gical cut that is enacted. 
A commut a tion onto logy that recog nizes 
the insepar ab il ity of agency and the 
simul tan eity of cause and eﬀ ect can 
radic ally shift  human excep tion al ism but 
also raise the ethical stakes as agency 
becomes distrib uted and spatial, instead of 
pre- given and temporal. As agency lays 
new ground in this never the less ground-
less model, ethics becomes extremely 
contin gent to the mater ial eﬀ ects on 
the bodies that are consti tuted by the 
agen tial cut. 
 See also Locality/Non- separ ab il ity; Post-
human Ethics; Posthumanist Perform-
ativity; Ontological Turn; Multiverse. 
 Lila Athanasiadou 
 COMPUTATIONAL TURN  
 In the twenty- ﬁ rst century, the epistem o lo-
gical domin ance of comput ing has not 
only reduced know ledge to inform a tion 
but inform a tion itself has come to coin cide 
with large chunks of highly complex data 
that learn ing algorithms correl ate and 
continu ously model. Th is new form of 
discret iz a tion involves not only a break ing 
down of inform a tion chunks into bits that 
can be more easily reas sembled and clas si-
ﬁ ed. Instead, in this century the compu ta-
tional turn has been demarc ated by a new 
kind of inform a tion processing able to not 
only divide and add strings of data accord-
ing to programmed func tions. Th e devel-
op ment of learn ing algorithms in arti ﬁ  cial
COMPUTATIONAL TURN 
logic of programmed truths, but on the 
capa cit ies of auto mated systems to retrieve 
(and thus to directly act upon) large 
amounts of inform a tion. With the inter act-
ive machine, the compu ta tional methods 
of know ledge have also radic ally changed 
and involve no longer programmed, but 
program mable truths stem ming from 
the capa cit ies of algorithms to estab lish 
infer ence from the retrieval, correl a tion 
and clas si ﬁ c a tion of data. As know ledge 
becomes compu ta tion ally processed by 
means of algorithmic proced ures of 
search ing and sorting data, algorithmic 
auto ma tion has become central to cultural 
produc tion (through algorithmic- oriented 
search and analysis of computer simu la-
tions), to the polit ical machine of 
governance (through algorithmic and 
data mining systems of secur ity and 
control) and to the nature of machine 
think ing. More expli citly than ever, 
the compu ta tional turn is raising the 
ques tion of what and who is produ cing 
know ledge. 
 It is possible to distin guish three distinct 
orders of know ledge (cultural produc tion, 
governance and thought itself), which have 
become entangled with the twenty- ﬁ rst-
century form of compu ta tional auto ma-
tion. Th e ﬁ rst order concerns how the 
compu ta tional infra struc ture is trans form-
ing the very task of know ledge produc tion 
within the human it ies (an algorithmic- 
driven produc tion of culture). Th e second 
concerns the way auto nomic machines, 
data scrap ing and data mining tech niques 
show how the governance of popu la tions 
is increas ingly tending towards the 
meta- governance of data, involving the 
algorithmic embed ding of the social body 
within the body of data. Th e third order 
concerns the compu ta tion of thought itself; 
not the imit a tion of think ing, but whether 
compu ta tion is learn ing  how to elab or ate 
concepts through social, linguistic and 
Th is symbolic order of know ledge was not 
repres en ted in the form of the math em at-
ical model of a  calcu lus rati ocin ator , but 
more import antly was a vision of the auto-
mated capa cit ies to rational think ing 
insofar as comput ing could be embed ded 
in machines that could perform calcu lus. 
Leibniz’s early modern project of comput-
ing know ledge foresaw the link between 
discret iz a tion and auto ma tion and the 
emer gence of a univer sal machine that 
could store, processes and trans mit know-
ledge by means of a binary logic. Since 
then, the turn to compu ta tion has envis-
aged the possib il ity of invent ing a general 
system of order ing, clas si fy ing, compress-
ing and correl at ing data: a tran scend ental 
mode of think ing. Only aft er two centur-
ies, with the inven tion or the thought 
exper i ment of the Turing Machine, could 
the auto ma tion of know ledge ﬁ nally 
become more than a mere recom bin a tion 
of discrete bits. Th e method of discret iz a-
tion no longer has the task of break ing 
down complex ity into ﬁ nite units, but 
instead acquires the power of elab or at ing 
inform a tion to search for problem- solving 
solu tions. From crunch ing numbers to the 
auto ma tion of problem- solving, the Turing 
Machine intro duced a radical discov ery 
in compu ta tion, namely the oper at ive 
func tion or the perform at ive activ ity of 
inform a tion. With the Turing Machine, 
know ledge fully enters the modern infra-
struc ture of compu ta tional axio mat ics or 
truth contain ing logic absorb ing social 
activ it ies of inform a tion commu nic a tion 
and trans mis sion. Th e consequences of 
this new form of auto ma tion re- write the 
history of Western culture through the 
indus trial machine of the assembly line 
and Taylorist methods of produc tion. By 
the late 1980s, the Turing Machine had 
developed to become inter act ive and 
dialo gic ally respons ive to the envir on-
ment; no longer based on the deduct ive
vari ations. Th e shift  towards a non- rational 
model of power has meant that governance 
has acquired a systemic func tion al ity, 
which is inclus ive of excep tions as these 
become captured by the perform at ive 
produc tion of norms, emer ging as and 
when these are needed. No longer depend-
ent on  a priori axio mat ics, but on the inde-
term in acy of excep tions, the system atic 
quality of governance works to predict 
erratic conducts and to stat ist ic ally 
produce truths assembled by the data- 
driven compu ta tional machine. Here 
predic tion involves forward- looking eval-
u ation of data (the compu ta tional strat i ﬁ  -
c a tion of popu la tion within the fractal 
matrix of data, metadata, big data, soft  ware 
programs, algorithmic processing) estab-
lish ing a conduct of conduct, or regimes of 
intel li gib il ity run by machine. 
 From this stand point, not univer sal 
truths, but the mutab il ity of contin gency – 
lawless nature or unknown unknowns – 
have become the dynamic motor of a 
compu ta tional mode of predic tion aiming 
not simply at avoid ing but at stream ing risk 
towards its inev it able consequences. With 
the compu ta tional turn, the domin ance 
of uncer tainty and its unpro gram mable 
implic a tions have accel er ated the prolif er a-
tion of auto nomic responses. Here fear, 
anxiety and panic, as well as erratic beha-
viour and continu ous distrac tion are the 
motor of a social media culture of hyper-
 p res ence, and have become the univocal 
determ in ant of polar ized posi tions, short- 
circuit ing decision- making through  YES  
and  NO . As algorithms become the execut-
ors of sover eign decisions acting  when and  if 
the unse lec ted amounts of data can become 
func tional in stream ing, anti cip at ing and 
struc tur ing risk, then the compu ta tional 
turn comes to coin cide with an appar atus of 
governance oper at ing not only on bodies, 
but through the dati ﬁ c a tion of biolo gical, 
phys ical and cultural speciﬁ cit ies. 
cognit ive synthetic abstrac tions, and not 
simply learn ing  that , i.e. speciﬁ cit ies or 
context- bound know ledge.  
 Automated Criticality 
 In  How We Th ink , Katherine Hayles argues 
that the compu ta tional turn has led to an 
irre vers ible trans form a tion of analytic 
processing central to human it ies research. 
As methods of research and know ledge 
produc tion in the human it ies have become 
compu ta tion ally formed, Hayles suggests 
that code, algorithms and digital theory 
must become recog nized as an integ ral part 
of know ledge produc tion. Whilst compu ta-
tion involves quant it at ive methods of text 
analysis, the contin ental tradi tion in 
human it ies has histor ic ally ques tioned the 
notion- based and mnemonic studies in 
favour of crit ical, reﬂ ect ive and compar at ive 
learn ing. Hayles insists, however, that tech-
nical modes of know ledge are to be inte -
g rated and not opposed to crit ical modes of 
learn ing. As tech no logy has a direct impact 
on modes of under stand ing and learn ing, 
Hayles argues that web- based and machine 
reading oﬀ er new capa cit ies to process mass 
amounts of inform a tion that funda ment ally 
extend know ledge produc tion and not only 
possib il it ies of know ledge storing.  
 Algorithmic Sovereignty 
 Th e issue of how compu ta tional processing 
can extend the limits of know ledge and 
whether it can enhance the possib il it ies of 
crit ical think ing raise the ques tion of 
governance at the core of the compu ta-
tional turn. As auto nomic comput ing 
subtends the ubiquit ous use of stat ist ical 
methods to calcu late risks, so has techno- 
governance, as Michel Foucault anti ci   -
p ated, become oper at ive or able to act upon 
or respond directly to contin gen cies and
CONTEMPORARY, THE 
might imagine a reﬂ ec tion of and  in time 
and tempor al ity that precisely looks for a 
rela tion to the present that would allow 
escap ing the logic of defer ral and post-
pone ment towards which the revolu tion-
ary left  is oft en tending. Drawing on 
Nietzsche’s notion of the untimely and the 
anachron istic, as prerequis ites of being 
truly contem por ary, philo sopher Giorgio 
Agamben renders ‘the contem por ary’ as 
the indi vidual ‘who ﬁ rmly holds his gaze 
on his own time so as to perceive not its 
light, but rather its dark ness’ ( Agamben 
2009 : 44). To be contem por ary then means 
to inhabit a stance toward the present that 
pays atten tion to the ‘unlived’. Agamben 
thus proposes ‘an arche ology’ that ‘returns 
to that part within the present that we are 
abso lutely incap able of living’ (ibid.: 51). In 
this view, to be contem por ary is the capa-
city to recom pose the present by having it 
being ‘touched’ (53) by the past, in order to 
actu al ize its trans- temporal poten ti al it ies. 
 Alternative models of a less melan cholic 
and instead urgent polit ics of the present 
have been developed in the ﬁ elds of posthu-
man, post co lo nial, femin ist or postra cial, as 
well as in recent envir on ment al ist, climate 
change 
and 
anthro po cene 
discourse. 
Leaving behind linear and tele olo gical 
patterns of think ing time, the ‘abso lute 
bound ary between here- now and there- 
then’ is being ques tioned by thinkers 
conceiv ing ‘new tempor al it ies (space time-
mat ter ings)’ such as femin ist phys i cist 
Karen Barad ( 2014 : 168). ‘Th ere is nothing 
that is new,’ Barad main tains, ‘there is 
nothing that is not new’ (ibid.). In other 
words, one cannot (not) be surprised by 
what is taking place in time, while tradi-
tional notions of cause and eﬀ ect become 
lost in the nonlin ear ity of ‘space time mat ter-
ings’. 
Deconstructing 
any 
dicho tomy 
between (histor ical) human ity and (time-
less) nature, the revi sion of tempor al ity 
accord ing to the complex it ies of an updated 
 See also  AI (Artiﬁ cial Intelligence); 
Metadata Society; Altergorithm; Execution; 
Neocybernetics; Postimage. 
 Luciana Parisi 
 CONTEMPORARY, THE  
 In the aft er math of the ruptures of 1989, 
when post mod ern ity ulti mately turned 
 posthis toire  in certain quar ters of ideo logy 
produc tion, 1 a pervas ive present seemed 
to have triumphed for ever over past and 
future alike. At the ﬁ nal stage of the 
immin ent break down of the grand narra-
tives of progress and eman cip a tion, with 
glob al iz a tion and digit al iz a tion prior it iz ing 
spatial over temporal matters, exclus ive 
and exclu sion ary rela tions with a partic u lar 
under stand ing of contem por an eity became 
some thing of a norm. Obsessively and 
viol ently colon iz ing the present as the 
only temporal zone relev ant for capit al ist 
valor iz a tion and geopol it ical tamper ing 
neces sitated the meth od ical oblit er a tion of 
what may cause threats to the mono poly of 
the now. Hence, the discurs ive and mater ial 
neut ral iz a tion of the past by a cultural 
economy of memori al iz a tion and musei ﬁ -
ca tion is only paralleled by the temporal 
philo sophies of ﬁ nance and secur ity, both 
predic ated on notions of anti cip a tion, 
‘futures’ and pre- emption. Combined, 
retro ma niac nostal gia and the poli cing of 
tomor row elicited a dispersal of contem por-
an eit ies; the produc tion of a ubiquit ous 
present of however multiple presents blocks 
futur ity as much as it does histor ical thought. 
 Most concep tions of time and tempor-
al ity based on a critique of the present state 
of power rela tions and the projec tion of a 
coming revolu tion reject any aﬃ  rm a tion 
of the present as a sign of stasis, anomie or 
surrender. Yet pausing for a moment with 
the contin gency of that aﬃ  rm a tion, one
of some respons ib il ity,’ based on a ‘non- 
contem por an eity with itself’, concern ing 
‘those who  are not there , of those who are 
no longer or who are not yet  present and 
living ’ ( Derrida 1994 : xix). Assemblage 
and assembly of dispar ate tempor al it ies, 
posthu man 
onto lo gies 
and 
polit ical 
projects alike, the contem por ary conceived 
as a reality of becom ings and an ethical 
resource relin quishes the reduct ive con-
tem por an eity of  posthis toire . Th is way, to 
enter the contem por ary means to leave the 
present as now- time for the poten ti al ity of 
a commun al ity of tempor al it ies, in which 
the thinkab il ity of the future is connec ted 
to, but not limited by, an archae ology of a 
shared present touched by whatever past. 
 See also Afrofuturism; Art; Art in the 
Anthropocene; Metamodernism; Ecopathy; 
Posthuman Museum Practice,  
 Note 
 1. For a useful discus sion of the prob lem atic 
notion of ‘post mod ern ism’ as a ‘special 
moment in  posthis toire thought’ see 
archi tec tural histor ian Anthony Vidler’s 
chapter ‘Postmodern or  Posthistoire ?’ in 
his  Histories of the Immediate Present: 
Inventing 
Architectural 
Modernism 
(Cambridge,  MA :  MIT Press, 2008), 
191–200.    
 Tom Holert 
 COSMOPOLITICS  
 Cosmopolitics points towards the re- 
invig or a tion of the plan et ary sphere of 
polit ical theory and action in the age of 
ecolo gical anxiety. It arises out of the reali-
z a tion that the triumphal ist rhet oric of 
cosmo pol it an ism is out of place in a world 
in which the cultural and polit ical assump-
tions on which it rested have been radic ally 
mater i al ist onto logy which fully acknow-
ledges the trans form at ive, hybrid entan gle-
ments of tech no logy, geology, biology, 
physics, polit ics, etc., may yield a concept of 
the present to be appro pri ately framed as 
‘the contem por ary’. Such framing may be 
expan ded to be organ ized around the real iz-
a tion that the realm of the now is always 
shared by others of whatever kind and time. 
Th e ‘shared inhab it a tion of time’, as artist 
and theor ist Shuddhabrata Sengupta from 
Raqs Media Collective once put it, ‘leads one 
to think of diﬀ er ent registers of temporal 
exist ence’, because, contrary to the assump-
tion ‘that contem por an eity has a certain 
single direc tion and a certain single velo city’, 
it may be possible ‘to think of these inhab it-
a tions of shared moments of time leading to 
move ments in very diﬀ er ent direc tions and 
at diﬀ er ent speeds’ ( Raqs Media Collective, 
Sundaram and Zyman 2012 ). Th e emphasis 
on multi direc tion al ity and multive lo city 
certainly is key to an under stand ing of the 
contem por ary that avoids any reiﬁ c a tion of 
the present as homo gen eous, merely 
temporal and oper at ive disjunct ively with 
regard to past and future. Heterogeneous, 
5-D, non- iden tit arian and inclus ive, the 
contem por ary in this other sense is a 
moving assemblage of tempor al it ies, spati-
al it ies, mater i al it ies and live li hoods that is 
not neces sar ily depend ent on a future to be 
activ ated. Although poten tially ‘drawing 
energy from the thinkab il ity of the future’ 
and thus facil it at ing ‘a trans form a tion at the 
in- depth level’ ( Braidotti 2006a : 207), the 
contem por ary also thrives on radical 
coeval ness, or what anthro po lo gist Johannes 
Fabian has iden ti ﬁ ed as ‘the elements of a 
proces sual and mater i al ist theory apt to 
coun ter act the hege mony of taxo nomic and 
repres ent a tional [i.e. visu al ist] approaches’ 
( Fabian 2002 : 156). Furthermore, the 
contem por ary is the subject of a justice 
‘beyond all living present’, as Jacques 
Derrida called it, that is of ‘the prin ciple
COSMOPOLITICS 
a more funda mental cause. Despite the 
broad ness of the cosmo pol itan outlook in 
compar ison to the narrow ness of nation al-
ist essen tial ism, the vision of the cosmos 
to which it appeals has been revealed as 
both anthro po centric and ethno cen tric. 
Awareness of the moment ous scale of 
anthro po genic changes to the natural 
processes of the Planet summed up by the 
Anthropocene and accel er ated by ever-
more tangible evid ence of climate emer-
gency and species extinc tion has rendered 
redund ant attempts to think the polit ics of 
the cosmos in purely human terms or 
solely in refer ence to the Western polit ical 
tradi tion. Th e timeli ness of cosmo pol it ics 
lies in the poten tial it oﬀ ers to open up for 
discus sion 
the 
auto matic 
exclu sions 
inscribed in cosmo pol it an ism, thereby 
lift ing the restric tion on imagin ing a plan-
et ary community that is inclus ive of all 
kinds of human and non- human actors. 
 Cosmopolitics signals the emer gence 
of an expan ded notion of polit ics which, 
as Bruno Latour has argued, both goes 
beyond ‘give- and-take in an exclus ive 
human club’ (2004b: 454) and dislodges 
unre ﬂ ect ing 
assump tions 
about 
the 
cosmos as a ‘ﬁ nite list of entit ies that must 
be taken into account’. Th e opening up of 
the list of entit ies entitled to parti cip ate in 
cosmo pol it ical debate could be seen in the 
rise of a plan et ary juris pru dence that in 
the case of the Constitution of Equador 
codi ﬁ es the rights of Pachamama or 
nature, while the Swiss Constitution now 
recog nizes the right to dignity of plants 
and other organ isms. Th e novelty of 
cosmo pol it ics as a supra- polit ical project 
lies in making expli cit the connec tion of 
humans to other species, but also to entit-
ies with a distinct mater i al ity and non- 
human agency, from rocks and rivers to 
particles and phys ical forces. 
 Th e ecolo gical urgency of the cosmo-
pol it ical propos i tion can be detec ted in 
destabil ized. Th e conﬁ d ence with which 
cosmo pol it an ism could assert the valid ity 
of an aﬃ  rm at ive and progress ive polit ical 
narrat ive that was destined to eclipse out-
dated modes of national iden tity has been 
under mined by the appar ent revers ib il ity 
of the processes of glob al iz a tion, both 
econom ic ally and in terms of polit ical con-
scious ness. Th e cosmo pol it ical propos i tion 
recog nizes the desirab il ity of an ambi tious 
refram ing of polit ics that reaches beyond 
settled categor ies, borders and territ or ies, 
but also the prac tical and philo soph ical 
diﬃ   culties in recom pos ing plan et ary 
polit ics on a more inclus ive basis. 
 Even during the rise of glob al iz a tion in 
the 1990s, advoc ates of cosmo pol it an ism 
were forced to acknow ledge that there was 
nothing inev it able about the emer gence of 
a global, plural, popular polit ical conscious-
ness as a consequence of increased mobil-
ity and inter con nec ted ness, with theor ist 
Pheng Cheah stating that ‘an exist ing global 
condi tion’ should not be mistaken for an 
‘exist ing mass- based feeling of belong ing to 
a world community (cosmo pol it an ism)’ 
( Cheah and Robbins 1998 : 31). In the wake 
of the global economic crisis begin ning in 
2008, the mater ial condi tions for the 
produc tion of senti ments of trans- national 
and post- national belong ing have retreated, 
bring ing a retrench ment of cultural paro-
chi al ism and popular cynicism towards the 
polit ical motives of global elites and their 
cultural agents. In place of the accep ted 
rules and restric tions of polit ical ration al ity 
based on the inter change between nation- 
states and citizen- subjects, the cosmo pol it-
ical proposal opens out onto what Isabelle 
Stengers has referred to as the ‘unknown 
consti tuted by . . . multiple, diver gent 
worlds’ (2005: 995) and their poten tial 
artic u la tions. 
 Th e stalling of the cosmo pol itan 
mission, and the mobil iz a tion of the 
cosmo pol it ical propos i tion, stem also from
glob al iz a tion, tech nos cience, late capit al-
ism and climate change (oft en, very prob-
lem at ic ally, by delib er ately blur ring the 
distinc tions between science ﬁ ction and 
science fact; cf. ‘science faction’ in 
 Herbrechter 2013 : 107–34). 
 Th e preﬁ x ‘post-’ (in analogy with the 
discus sion of the post mod ern and post-
mod ern ism follow ing  Lyotard 1992b ) also 
has a double meaning: on the one hand, 
it signi ﬁ es a desire or indeed a need to 
somehow go  beyond human ism (or the 
human), while on the other hand, since 
the  post-  also neces sar ily repeats what it 
preﬁ xes, it displays an aware ness that 
neither human ism nor the human can in 
fact be over come in any straight for ward 
 dialect ical or histor ical fashion (for 
example, in the sense: aft er the human, 
the posthu man). Th e  crit ical in the phrase 
‘crit ical posthu man ism’ gestures towards 
the more complic ated and non- dialect ical 
rela tion ships between human and post  -
hu man (as well as their respect ive depend-
ence on the  nonhu man ). Posthumanism in 
this crit ical sense func tions more like an 
anamnesis and a  rewrit ing of the human 
and human ism (i.e. ‘rewrit ing human ity’, in 
analogy with Lyotard’s notion of ‘rewrit ing 
modern ity’:  Lyotard 1991 ).  Critical post-
hu man ism asks a number of ques tions that 
address these complic a tions: how did we 
come to think of ourselves as human? Or, 
what exactly does it mean to be human 
(espe cially at a time when  some humans 
have appar ently decided that they are 
becom ing 
or 
have 
 already 
become 
 post human)? What are the motiv a tions for 
this  posthu man iz ing process and when did 
it start? What are its implic a tions for 
nonhu man others (e.g. the ‘envir on ment’, 
‘animals’, ‘machines’, ‘God’, etc.)? 
 Th e adject ive  crit ical in the phrase 
‘crit ical posthu man ism’ thus signi ﬁ es at 
least two things. It refers to the diﬀ er ence 
between a more or less uncrit ical or 
Peter Sloterdijk’s call for a ‘new consti tu-
tional debate’ involving a ‘network of 
processes’ to ‘recon sti t ute the collect ive 
of Earth Citizens as a collect ive subject ive 
in various arrange ments’. Such a process, 
respond ing 
to 
the 
revival 
in 
the 
Anthropocene of a neo-Hobbesian State- 
of-Nature, would as he argues neces sar ily 
have to take into account ‘the cohab it a tion 
of the citizens of the Earth in human and 
non- human forms’ ( Sloterdijk 2015 : 337–
9). Cosmopolitics shows the way beyond 
the busi ness- as-usual consensus around 
the subject and bound ar ies of the domain 
of global polit ics to tack ling the deep- 
rooted conﬂ ict of interest between glob al-
ized elites and the plan et ary poor, who are 
least well equipped to delay the impacts of 
climate change. It also reﬂ ects recog ni tion 
of collect ive, polit ical respons ib il ity on the 
level of human kind for the trans form a tion 
of the cosmos from a species- neutral back-
drop to an unwit ting exten sion of the 
human realm. 
 See 
also 
Anthropocene; 
Planetary; 
Ecosophy; 
Earth; 
Geopolitics; 
Non-
Human Agency; Posthuman Rights. 
 Maja and Reuben Fowkes 
 CRITICAL POSTHUMANISM  
 Critical posthu man ism is a theor et ical 
approach which maps and engages with 
the ‘ongoing decon struc tion of human ism’ 
(cf.  Badmington 2000 ). It diﬀ er en ti ates 
between the  ﬁ gure  of the ‘posthu man’ (and 
its present, past and projec ted avatars, like 
cyborgs, monsters, zombies, ghosts, angels, 
etc.) and ‘posthu man ism’ as the contem-
por ary social  discourse (in the Foucauldian 
sense), which nego ti ates the press ing 
contem por ary ques tion of what it means 
to be human under the condi tions of
CRITICAL POSTHUMANISM 
appar atus of liter acy and its central insti tu-
tion of liter at ure, with all its social, 
economic and cultural- polit ical implic a-
tions, its regimes of power and its aesthet-
ics behind. 
 To counter the trend of seeing posthu-
man ism merely as the ‘next theory fashion’, 
my  Posthumanism: A Critical Analysis 
( Herbrechter 2013 ) takes as its start ing 
point the ques tion as to what extent post-
struc tur al ism and decon struc tion have 
anti cip ated current posthu man ist formu-
la tions and critiques of subjectiv ity. Th is 
aspect is partic u larly import ant with 
regard to the current discus sion about the 
import ance and future role of the human-
it ies. Th e ﬁ rst academic public a tions that 
system at ic ally engage with the idea of the 
posthu man and posthu man ism appeared 
in the late 1990s and early 2000s (in books 
and articles by Neil Badmington, Rosi 
Braidotti, Elaine L. Graham, N. Katherine 
Hayles, Cary Wolfe and others), all of 
which approach posthu man ism through a 
more or less post struc tur al ist or decon-
struct ive lens. Th ey do so, however, by 
embra cing two new aspects: a return to 
or of the ques tion of tech no logy (as it 
had been provoc at ively formu lated by 
Heidegger ( 1977 )) and the ques tion of the 
future of the human it ies. 
 An increas ing part of the academy and 
the (theor et ical) human it ies in partic u lar 
have been embra cing this new context to 
form new, inter dis cip lin ary alli ances with 
the sciences and crit ical science studies 
(e.g. with Bruno Latour’s actor–network 
theory, spec u lat ive realism or new femin ist 
mater i al ism). One major aspect concerns 
the redeﬁ n i tion of the rela tion ship between 
humans and tech no logy – or the role of the 
history of ‘tech nics’ for human (and non- 
human) evol u tion. Donna Haraway’s early 
work on the cyborg (in the 1980s) received 
the wide spread discus sion it deserved. 
 popular (e.g. in many science ﬁ ction 
movies or popular science magazines) 
and a  philo soph ical and reﬂ ect ive approach 
that invest ig ates the current  post an thro po-
centric desire . Th is desire artic u lates itself, 
on the one hand, in the form of an anti ci -
p ated  tran scend ence of the human condi-
tion (usually through various scen arios of 
disem bod i ment – an approach (and an 
entire move ment that is best desig nated by 
the term ‘transhuman ism’) and, on the 
other hand, through a (rather suspi cious) 
attempt by humans to ‘argue them selves 
out of the picture’ precisely at a time when 
climate change caused by the impact of 
human civil iz a tion (cf.  Anthropocene ) calls 
for urgent and respons ible,  human action. 
 Th e other meaning of ‘crit ical’ is a 
defence and possibly a re- inven tion of 
some human ist  values  and  meth od o lo gies 
which, in the face of a funda mental trans-
form a tion provoked by digit al iz a tion and 
the advent of ubiquit ous comput ing and 
social media, appear to have become 
obsol ete, or to be in urgent need of revi-
sion (espe cially crit ical meth od o lo gies 
which are related to tradi tional forms of 
‘liter acy’, ‘reading’ and ‘think ing’). Th e 
ques tion here is how to remain ‘crit ical’ in 
the sense of devel op ing reading tech-
niques, forms of concep tu al iz a tions and 
subjectiv it ies that are both self- reﬂ ex ive 
and aware of their own gene a lo gies (i.e. 
able to stay ‘crit ic ally’ connec ted with 
human ist, and pre- human ist, tradi tions 
and espe cially ‘literal’, ‘liter ary’ and ‘textual’ 
approaches). 1 
 Studies of liter at ure’s twenty- ﬁ rst-
century exten sions 2 have ques tioned the 
broader reson ances of the idea that the 
liter ary is currently being ‘over taken’ by 
processes of digit al iz a tion, glob al iz a tion 
and tech nos cientiﬁ c change. In this current 
supposedly ‘post- liter ary’ moment, a crit-
ical posthu man ist (and ‘coun ter tex tual’) 
approach is both aware and wary of the
rela tion ship between human agency, the 
role of tech nology and envir on mental 
and cultural factors from a post- or non- 
anthro po centric 
perspect ive 
( Braidotti 
2013 ). Postanthropocentric posthu man it ies 
are still about humans and human it ies but 
only in so far as these are placed within a 
larger, ecolo gical, picture (cf. for example the 
insti tu tion al iz a tion of ‘medical human it ies’, 
‘envir on mental human it ies’ and ‘digital 
human it ies’).Th e latter, in partic u lar, will have 
to address the role of new and conver ging 
media and their social and cultural implic a-
tions, as well as the prolif er a tion of digital 
and virtual real it ies and their biopol it ical 
dimen sions (e.g. new forms of surveil lance 
and commodi ﬁ c a tion, new subjectiv it ies and 
‘biomedia’; cf.  Th acker 2004 ). 
 Critical posthu man ism thus draws 
together a number of aspects that consti-
tute ‘our’ early twenty- ﬁ rst-century reality 
and cosmo logy and links these back 
gene a lo gic ally to their begin nings and pre-
ﬁ g ur a tions within human ism itself (cf. 
 Herbrechter and Callus 2005 ,  2012 ). 
 See also Anthropism/Immanent Humanism; 
Posthumanism; 
Decolonial 
Critique; 
Posthuman (Critical Th eory; Speculative 
Posthumanism).  
 Note 
 1. Th is is one of the main concerns of the 
Critical Posthumanism Network, which I 
co- direct with Ivan Callus and Manuela 
Rossini; (see  http://crit ic al posthu man 
 ism.net) . 
   2. See for instance the journal  CounterText 
( http://www.euppub lish ing.com/loi/
count ). 
 Stefan Herbrechter 
Attempts to rethink the onto lo gical aspect 
of tech no logy and the polit ical role of 
tech no lo gical determ in ism, however, also 
look at previ ous philo sophies of tech no-
logy (espe cially in Heidegger, Ellul and 
Simondon), most prom in ently in Bernard 
Stiegler’s work. In the aft er math of the so- 
called ‘science wars’, which high lighted at 
once the neces sity of cultural recu per a-
tions of scientiﬁ c prac tice and the call for a 
new dialogue between the sciences and the 
human it ies, the new or ‘posthu man it ies’ 
(cf. the title of Cary Wolfe’s inﬂ u en tial 
series with University of Minnesota Press) 
are set to over come the tradi tional ‘two 
cultures’ divide at last. Th is is, however, 
happen ing under extremely adverse condi-
tions, namely the mater ial base of an 
increas ingly glob al ized advanced and 
neolib eral capit al ism, and the trans ition 
from ‘analogue’ (human ist, ‘lettered’, book 
or text- based) to ‘digital’ (posthu man ist, 
‘code’, data or inform a tion- based) soci et ies, 
cultures and econom ies. 
 Th e currently emer ging ‘posthu man it ies’ 
there fore have to engage with the posit ive 
but also the prob lem atic aspects of the trans-
form at ive poten tial that a new dialogue or 
alli ance between the human it ies and the 
sciences contains. Th e focus on the post-
human as a discurs ive object, on post hu-
man ism as a social discourse and on 
post hu man iz a tion as an ongoing histor ical 
and onto lo gical process allows both com-
munit ies – the human it ies and sciences – to 
create new encoun ters and test new hypo-
theses that may lead to greater polit ical and 
ethical aware ness of the place of the human, 
the nonhu man and their envir on ments 
(espe cially in connec tion with press ing 
issues like climate change, deple tion of 
natural resources, the destruc tion of bio-
diversity, global migra tion ﬂ ows, terror ism 
and insec ur ity, biopol it ics etc.). Basically,
Th e divide between the two ﬁ elds, however, 
is not merely histor ical: it is onto lo gical. 
 Racialization, 
from 
a 
deco lo nial 
perspect ive, is not an aber ra tion of history 
produced by yet another of ‘the human’s’ 
constitutive 
exclu sions 
or 
other ings. 
Racialization does not run along the same 
onto lo gical lines as, for example, sexual 
diﬀ er ence or gender: it is not that the basic 
mech an ism of constitutive exclu sion was 
also applied to non-European bodies and 
popu la tions in a manner that diﬀ ered 
histor ic ally from the applic a tion to non- 
male bodies. Th e project of deco lo nial 
critique is not the task of another correct-
ive to the unjus ti ﬁ ed norm ativ ity of the 
concept and ﬁ gure of ‘the human’. Rather, 
the found ing commit ment of deco lo nial 
critique is a chal lenge to the very onto logy 
of ‘the human’ as an endem ic ally violent 
concep tual appar atus. 
 Th is clear focus on racial iz a tion and its 
anti- black logic as the essen tial struc ture 
of ‘the human’ partic u larly distin guishes 
this schol ar ship from that of posthu man 
femin ism, with its roots in the debates 
about the concept of sexual diﬀ er ence. As 
the essen tial ist/construc tion ist debates of 
the 1990s displayed, the concept of sexual 
diﬀ er ence lies on the razor’s edge of a 
univer sal ist, biolo gical determ in ism and 
geopol it ic ally speciﬁ ed, social construc-
tion ism. Emergent out of this tension, 
posthu man femin ism approaches embod i-
ment through the axes of sexual diﬀ er ence, 
gender binar ies and poly morph ously 
perverse sexu al ity. Th is work tends to 
 D 
 DECOLONIAL CRITIQUE  
 To think and live race is to think and live 
history in every atom of one’s body. Unlike 
the essen tial ist stain that haunts concepts 
of sexual diﬀ er ence, racial diﬀ er ence is 
purely the eﬀ ect of violent cultural encoun-
ters with diﬀ er ing manners of living. Yet, 
despite this histor ic ally construc ted char-
ac ter, we cannot shake it oﬀ : we continue to 
embody race as the damning mark of 
diﬀ er ence that W. E. B. DuBois named ‘hair, 
skin, and bone’. Decolonial schol ar ship on 
race, espe cially that inﬂ ec ted by queer 
theory, locates this violent history of racial-
iz a tion as the site of the produc tion the 
concept and ﬁ gure of ‘the human’. It insists 
that racial iz a tion, a central tool of the colo-
nial scene, drives the emer gence of the 
modern concept of ‘the human’. For deco-
lo nial critique, racial iz a tion is endemic to 
‘the human’, not a pesky by- product or 
prob lem atic eﬀ ect of it. 
 To bring race and racial iz a tion into 
contact with posthu man ism is, there fore, 
not a simple task. As the 2015 Special Issue 
of  GLQ , ‘Queer Inhumanisms’, makes 
amply clear, the divi sions between deco lo-
nial, queer schol ar ship on racial iz a tion and 
schol ar ship on posthu man ism are fraught 
polit ic ally, histor ic ally and even onto lo gic-
ally. Th e co- editors, Dana Luciano and Mel 
Chen, explain in their Introduction that 
they chose ‘inhu man isms’ in an eﬀ ort ‘to 
recol lect and fore ground the very histor ies 
of dehu man iz a tion too oft en over looked in 
celeb rat ory posthu man isms’ (2015: 196).
claim to univer sal ism. In this manner, 
posthu man ism inher its the long tradi -
tions of Anglo-American and European 
femin isms, with their nine teenth- century 
roots 
in 
precisely 
this 
prob lem atic 
eclipse of the gendered char ac ter of 
Enlightenment human ism. Posthumanism, 
a 
late 
twen ti eth- century 
emer gence, 
complic ates and extends this funda mental 
critique to the entangled arcs of tech no lo-
gical medi ation and nonhu man sentient 
life, valor iz ing z oe and embod i ment as the 
onto lo gical sites of inter rog a tion. 
 Decolonial theor ies of racial iz a tion, 
espe cially those groun ded in the post- 
iden tit arian 
epistem o lo gies 
of 
queer 
theory, gener ally assume one, if not both, 
of two geohis tor ical coordin ates: ﬁ ft eenth- 
century European colo ni al ism and/or 
nine teenth- century chattel slavery, espe-
cially in the United States. Th e distinc tions 
between these two geohis tor ical sites are 
crucial, but I gener al ize them here as one 
move ment to explain how they both place 
racial iz a tion at the primary and essen tial 
origin for the construc tion of the ﬁ gure 
of ‘the human’. Th ese geohis tor ical co-
ordin ates thereby instan ti ate diﬀ er ent 
social onto lo gies from those assumed in 
posthu man ism. 
 Decolonial schol ar ship emerges out of 
clas sical post co lo nial critiques, such as 
Frantz Fanon, Aimé Césaire, Edward Said, 
and also out of slightly later iter a tions, 
such as Gloria Anzadúa, Stuart Hall, Paul 
Gilroy, Sadiya Hartman, Hortense Spillers, 
Eduard Glissant, Maria Lugones and 
perhaps espe cially Sylvia Wynter. It is 
Wynter who gives the most expans ive and 
emphat ic ally mater i al ist account of the 
decol on iz ing of, as she calls the ﬁ gures, 
‘Man1’ and ‘Man 2’. I oﬀ er a brief over view 
of her work as an exem plar of the deco lo-
nial critique of Man. 
 Wynter’s work is histor ic ally expans ive 
and the full bibli o graphy of her published 
emphas ize 
the 
socio- epistem o lo gical 
instabil it ies of these metrics, focus ing 
partic u larly on the constitutive exclu sion 
of sexual diﬀ er ence as the ‘other’ or ‘partic-
u lar’. By histor iciz ing this phenomenon in 
the seven teenth- and eight eenth- century 
normal iz a tion of bour geois sexu al ity, 
posthu man femin ism opens onto the 
imman ent plas ti city of embod i ment and, 
ulti mately,  zoe for the posthu man ist 
project. Th is histor ical loca tion places it in 
provoc at ive tension with deco lo nial femin-
ists, such as Hortense Spillers and Maria 
Lugones, who argue (with diﬀ er ent geopol-
it ical refer ents) that gender is always 
already a product of colo nial modern ity, 
inter pel lat ing only those subjects already 
in the throes of iden ti ﬁ c a tion with the 
ﬁ gure of ‘the human’. Th e diﬀ er ences 
between the foci on sexual diﬀ er ence and 
gender in these critiques remain to be 
parsed. From the perspect ive of deco lo nial 
critique, however, the eﬀ ort to undo ‘the 
human’ through the axes of either gender 
or sexual diﬀ er ence still works within the 
closed economy of colo nial modern ity. 
 At a general level, both posthu man ism 
and deco lo nial critique share a common 
point of depar ture – namely, the demand 
to move through and beyond the ﬁ gure 
of ‘the human’. Th e deco lo nial emphasis on 
the violent dehu man iz a tion endemic to 
the ﬁ gure of ‘the human’, however, orients 
deco lo nial schol ar ship towards a diﬀ er ent 
set of histor ical coordin ates than those 
assumed by posthu man ism. Th e follow ing 
is a brief account of these diﬀ er ent histor-
ical coordin ates, which mani fest distinct 
onto lo gies oper at ive in the two projects. 
 Posthumanism 
largely 
places 
the 
ﬁ gure of ‘the human’ in the European 
Enlightenment era of seven teenth- century 
ration al ism 
and 
eight eenth- century 
liberalism. Th is epistem o lo gical- polit ical 
construc tion, so the critique goes, birthed 
a human ism that stakes an unas sail able
DIFFRACTION 
 Across Wynter’s expans ive histor ical 
argu ments, she also devel ops a radic ally 
mater i al ist account of the embod i ment of 
these concep tual appar ati that oﬀ ers a 
partic u lar point of contact with threads of 
posthu man ism. Wynter builds on Fanon’s 
inven tion of socio geny to argue for a 
neuro chem ical account of our embod i-
ment of racial ized diﬀ er ences. As she 
writes in ‘Unparalleled Catastrophe for 
Our Species? Or, to Give Humanness a 
Diﬀ erent Future: Conversations’, socio-
genic scripts of symbolic life/death repeat 
and sedi ment norm at ive eval u ations of 
our shared social worlds by activ at ing 
‘the 
opiate- reward 
(placebo) 
and 
opiate- block ing (nocebo) neuro chem ical 
system of the . . . uniquely evolved human 
brain’ (2015: 58). Th is mater i al ist turn 
towards the neuro chem ical embod i ment 
of both posit ive and negat ive eval u ations 
carried by the concep tual appar atus of ‘the 
human’ oﬀ ers an intriguing bridge to the 
Deleuzian, Harawayan techno- medi ation 
threads of posthu man ism. 
 See 
also 
Afrofuturism; 
In/Human; 
Necropolitics; Neocolonial; Postmedieval; 
Real Cool Ethics; Socially Just Pedagogies. 
 Shannon Winnubst 
 DIFFRACTION  
 ‘Diﬀ raction’ is Donna Haraway’s term for a 
reading method that is neither negat ively 
crit ical (dismissive) nor reﬂ ex ive (iden tity- 
polit ical). Haraway ( [1992] 2004a ,  1997 ) 
argues against the polit ics of nega tion as 
well as she argues against the polit ics of 
reﬂ ec tion. Negation puts the negated on a 
pedes tal and may there fore not be the best 
femin ist reading strategy. For example, 
negat ing the work of Bruno Latour for its 
genderblind ness, its neat separ a tion of the 
work is, as yet, diﬃ   cult to assemble. In 
‘Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/
Truth/Freedom: Towards the Human, 
Aft er Man, Its Overrepresentation – An 
Argument,’ Wynter locates the emer gence 
of the prob lem atic ﬁ gure of Man 1 in the 
writ ings of the Renaissance human ists of 
the ﬁ ft eenth century, the same century that 
brings European colo ni al ism to various 
parts of the globe. Focusing on ‘the theo-
Scholastic know ledge system of the medi-
eval order of Latin-Christian Europe’ (2003: 
20), Wynter argues that the shift  in this 
period from super nat ural caus a tion to 
natural caus a tion enables and enlivens two 
other global shift s: the massive expro pri-
ation and enslave ment of two human 
groups (‘Indos’ and ‘Negroes’); and the 
possible rise and devel op ment of the phys-
ical sciences as a new order of human 
cogni tion, which would come fully to 
fruition in the work of Darwin. According 
to this same Renaissance human ist ‘closed 
order of know ledge’, wherein ‘Nature’ 
replaces ‘God’, the ﬁ gure of the ‘Negro’ 
emerges as the secu lar ized ‘name of evil’ 
(2003: 307), leading Wynter to place early 
deﬁ n i tions of ‘race’ in Peter Martyr’s texts of 
1516, with the ﬁ rst attempt at racial clas si-
ﬁ c a tion in the work of Francois Bernier in 
1684. Th e ﬁ ft eenth- century contem por an-
eous move ments of European colo ni al ism 
and Renaissance human ism thereby mark 
the emer gence of what Wynter names 
‘Man1’, a complex concep tual appar atus 
that locks the ﬁ gure of the human directly 
into the viol ence of colo ni al ist racial iz a tion. 
‘Man2’ then emerges as the nine teenth- 
century ‘biocentric’ concept of post-
Darwinian science, build ing on the late 
eight eenth- century racial iz ing taxonom ies 
of Linnaeus, that carries the binary viol ence 
of Man/Other endemic to the prior theo lo-
gical appar atus into the fully secu lar ized 
discourses of science and their inter twin ing 
with bour geois capit al ism.
liberal or Marxist/social ist or lesbian or 
sexual- diﬀ er ence or. . .). Diﬀ ractive read-
ings take oﬀ  else where and have diﬀ er ing 
eﬀ ects. Imagine acci dent ally picking up a 
book written by Y or encoun ter ing an 
artwork of Z. It may very well be that the 
reader or viewer is inter pel lated by Y’s 
writing ( van der Tuin 2014 ) or aﬀ ected by 
Z’s artwork ( Papenburg and Zarzycka 
2013 ) before having consciously recapit-
ulated one’s posi tion as scholar, one’s 
femin ist stance or the makers’ canon ical 
repres ent a tion. Th is implies that one 
cannot presume to know when and where 
schol ar ship begins, when and how femin-
ism is triggered or how a text or arte fact is 
liked or disliked. Th e diﬀ ract ive moment is 
when such inter pel la tions or aﬀ ec tions 
happen. Th e surprise of an inter pel la tion 
or of aﬀ ect is taken to be a moment of 
insight that is of import ance for the 
produc tion of know ledge. 
 Karen Barad ( 2003 ,  2007 ) has worked 
out the consequences of Haraway’s diﬀ rac-
tion by further ing the argu ment that 
diﬀ ract ive read ings can be made product-
ive for femin ist schol ar ship: 
 Moving away from the repres ent a tion al ist 
trap of geomet rical optics, I shift  the focus 
to phys ical optics, to ques tions of diﬀ rac-
tion rather than reﬂ ec tion. Diﬀ ractively 
reading the insights of femin ist and queer 
theory and science studies approaches 
through one another entails think ing the 
‘social’ and the ‘scientiﬁ c’ together in an 
illu min at ing way. What oft en appears as 
separ ate entit ies (and separ ate sets of 
concerns) with sharp edges does not actu-
ally entail a rela tion of abso lute exter i or ity 
at all. Like the diﬀ rac tion patterns illu-
min at ing the indeﬁ n ite nature of bound-
ar ies – display ing shadows in ‘light’ regions 
and bright spots in ‘dark’ regions – the 
rela tion of the social and the scientiﬁ c is 
a rela tion of ‘exter i or ity within’. Th is is not 
a static rela tion al ity but a doing – the 
social and the tech nical and its over look-
ing of the labour and suﬀ er ing of labor at-
ory animals does not change the work or 
do any good for femin ism. Instead, a negat-
ively crit ical eval u ation of Latour’s schol ar-
ship and writing draws more atten tion to 
Latour and less to femin ism. Likewise, 
Haraway says that ‘reﬂ ex iv ity, like reﬂ ec-
tion, only displaces the same else where’ 
(1997: 16) and is equally not crit ical 
enough. For instance, if I were to reﬂ ect on 
the French philo sophy of Michel Foucault, 
I would ﬁ rst expose my femin ism and then 
I would use what has become of femin ism 
within the conﬁ nes of my analysis in order 
to expose Foucault’s mascu line bias, 
notwith stand ing the fact that both (my) 
femin ism and Foucauldian histor ical 
epistem o logy exceed such expos i tions! A 
certain pattern of repe ti tion under lies both 
negat ively crit ical and reﬂ ex ive analyses as 
a dismissive femin ist analysis tends to 
repeat the negated minutely and reﬂ ex ive 
femin ist analysis does the same by care-
fully mirror ing what a text or other cultural 
arte fact does to a precon ceived femin ist 
subject. Both meth od o lo gies ulti mately 
leave the negated or the displaced 
unchanged. Diﬀ ractive read ings try to 
circum vent 
these 
consequences 
and 
provoke change. 
 Diﬀ raction is ﬁ rst and fore most a 
reading strategy that does justice to cracks 
in the academic canon ( van der Tuin 
2015a ). Readings of texts that follow the 
canon are read ings that care fully repro-
duce the estab lished para met ers of 
academic schol ar ship. Such repro duc tion 
may be caused by nega tion or reﬂ ec tion. 
Imagine perform ing a femin ist reading of 
the work of X. Th e result is a distan cing act: 
both femin ism and the work of X are left  
untouched because the reading method 
assumes that femin ism and X’s work are 
separ ate entit ies and that ‘femin ism’ is a 
known and stable posi tion (it is either
DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP 
in the world. Rather, we learn about 
phenom ena – about speciﬁ c mater ial 
conﬁ g ur a tions of the world’s becom ing.  
 Barad 2007 : 90–1 
 Just like quantum phys ical inter fer ence is 
not about particles hitting an obstacle or 
about waves being disturbed by an obstacle 
but about the pattern emer ging from the 
entan gle ment of object (like light) and 
meas ur ing device, the diﬀ ract ive reading 
of texts and/or arte facts through one 
another is about the patterns emer ging. 
Th ese patterns do not depend on canons. 
 See also Joy; Critical Posthuman Th eory; 
Feminist Posthumanities; Mattering 
 Iris van der Tuin  
 DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP  
 Th e ques tion of citizen ship has been at the 
heart of philo soph ical inter rog a tions since 
at least Plato’s  Republic . Th e Enlightenment, 
with its partic u lar way of connect ing 
ration al ity, ethics and polit ics into an 
integ rated whole, has cemen ted the ques-
tion as central to our think ing about the 
rela tion ship 
between 
indi vidual 
and 
collect ive, between citizen and govern-
ment. At the same time, from the Greek 
banish ment of  techne  into the realm of 
those excluded from citizen ship (women 
and slaves) to the highly crit ical stance 
toward tech no logy in twen ti eth- century 
philo sophy – such as Heidegger, Ellul, 
Illich and Adorno – there is a ‘devalu ation 
of tech no logy in Western philo sophy’ 
( Frabetti 2011 ), a distinct uneas i ness, if not 
a down right refusal, to consider tech no-
logy with the same depth of atten tion as 
art, ritual or polit ics. Digital citizen ship 
thus is a ﬁ eld in which the two come 
enact ment of bound ar ies – that always 
entails constitutive exclu sions and there-
fore requis ite ques tions of account ab il ity.  
 Barad 2003 : 803 
 Th is quota tion demon strates not only that 
diﬀ rac tion has a quantum phys ical back-
ground and is ﬁ rmly based in the coun ter-
in tu it ive insights oﬀ ered by quantum 
physics. Th e quota tion also makes clear 
what the outcomes of a diﬀ ract ive reading 
of texts are: they expose ‘exter i or it ies 
within’. In other words, not only do diﬀ ract-
ive read ings ques tion the separ a tion of the 
social and the tech nos cientiﬁ c; and the 
separ a tion of femin ist, queer and science 
studies oeuvres. Th ey also provide insight 
into the nature of diﬀ er ence  without a 
capital D. 
 Diﬀ ractive readers do not care about 
canon ical render ings of texts or of arte-
facts because they zoom in on how texts, 
arte facts and human subjects inter pel late 
or aﬀ ect each other. Instead of submissively 
follow ing a (counter-)canon, diﬀ ract ive 
readers ask how texts, arte facts and 
humans may inform each other as a result 
of their preconscious or sub- subject ive 
entan gle ment. Scribbling ‘cf. Ernst Cassirer’ 
in the margins of a text written by Gilbert 
Simondon is a diﬀ ract ive moment that 
may have far- reach ing consequences. Th e 
diﬀ rac tion may lead to an analysis of how 
Cassirer and Simondon inform each other, 
leading to a concept as yet unknown to the 
philo sophy of tech no logy (see  Hoel and 
van der Tuin 2013 ). Again, in Barad’s 
terms: 
 a diﬀ ract ive meth od o logy is a crit ical 
prac tice for making a diﬀ er ence in the 
world. It is a commit ment to under stand-
ing which diﬀ er ences matter, how they 
matter, and for whom. It is a crit ical prac-
tice of engage ment, not a distance- learn ing 
prac tice of reﬂ ect ing from afar . . . We do 
not uncover preex ist ing facts about inde-
we receive [is] distort ing, if not outrightly 
corrupt ing, our national civic conver sa-
tion’ ( Keen 2007 ), we ﬁ nd numer ous attri-
bu tions of direct caus al ity – such as in the 
case of the Arab Spring – between new 
media and varying states of culture and 
polit ics. 
 On the level of  polit ical prac tice , 
which includes forms of govern ment 
and governance, non- govern mental work, 
voicing of consent or dissent, campaign-
ing, resist ance, value produc tion and 
iden tity form a tion, new media may not 
be a suﬃ   cient ‘cause’, but they are nonethe-
less instru mental to actors and social 
move ments such as the Arab Spring 
and enable new forms of activ ism such 
as hackt iv ism ( Coleman 2013 ), ‘leaking’, 
online campaign ing, citizen journ al ism or 
‘crowd sourcing for demo cracy’ ( Aitamurto 
2012 ) and  sous veil lance (‘watch ing the 
watch ers’). 
 As a result, polit ical insti tu tions, and in 
partic u lar the govern ments of tradi tional 
nation states, appear weakened by these 
new forms of commu nic a tion and parti-
cip a tion. However, if Facebook and 
Twitter are playing their role in polit ical 
dynam ics, it is neces sary to under stand 
these plat forms them selves as  insti tu tions , 
i.e. as ‘multi fa ceted systems incor por at ing 
symbolic systems, cognit ive construc tions 
and norm at ive rules’, which ‘provide stabil-
ity and meaning to social beha vior’ ( Scott 
1994 ). In this sense, we need to inter rog ate 
the aﬀ ord ances of new media plat forms 
and maybe go as far as consid er ing soft -
ware as an insti tu tional arrange ment in 
its own right ( Rieder 2012a ). With Hartley 
( 2003 ), we can describe these plat forms 
as ‘tech no lo gies of the public’ that are 
shaping public discourse, for example by 
intro du cing socio- tech nical regimes of 
‘issue visib il ity’, where issue hier arch ies are 
oft en set by combin a tions of crowds and 
algorithms. Th ese ques tions can be brought 
together as a result of profound changes 
brought about by the prolif er a tion of the 
digital, which in turn aﬀ ects the way we 
become and express ourselves as citizens.  
 Politics and Practice 
 From Lippmann to Habermas and beyond, 
the argu ment has been made again and 
again that there is a close rela tion ship 
between demo cracy (to which the notion 
of citizen ship is closely related) and conﬁ g-
ur a tions of commu nic a tion and inform a-
tion exchange. With John Hartley, one can 
thus approach the ques tion of digital 
citizen ship not so much in terms of indi-
vidual conduct or parti cip a tion, but as 
refer ring to the ques tion of the ‘infra struc-
ture’ of demo cracy, or the ‘tech no lo gies of 
demo cracy’, i.e. ‘the mech an isms through 
which demo cracy and the public are 
created, sustained, and oper ated’ ( Hartley 
2003 : 269). Th ese mech an isms have been 
aﬀ ected by tech no lo gical change, and quite 
dramat ic ally so. 
 On a very imme di ate level, it has been 
argued that ‘varied prop er ties [of the inter-
net] enable new forms of parti cip a tion, 
which may either change or replic ate exist-
ing social rela tions’ ( Mossberger, Tolbert 
and McNeal. 2008 ). But on a more general 
level, our sense of self, our ways of becom-
ing, our modes of expres sion, our prac tices 
of relat ing to others, and so forth, are 
equally aﬀ ected, and these elements are 
central to the devel op ment of the polit ical 
desires that drive us. 
 Th e ‘demo crat iz ing’ eﬀ ects of the inter-
net have been discussed at length, all too 
oft en in simplistic terms, pitch ing one set 
of facile gener al iz a tions against another. 
Between the announce ment that ‘[t]he Net 
inter prets censor ship as damage and routes 
around it’ (attrib uted to John Gilmore) and 
the assess ment that the ‘decline of the 
quality and reli ab il ity of the inform a tion
DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP 
society: ‘Digital citizens are those who use 
tech no logy frequently, who use tech no logy 
for polit ical inform a tion to fulﬁ ll their civic 
duty, and who use tech no logy at work for 
economic gain’ ( Mossberger et al. 2008 ). 
 However, does use of tech no logy imply 
parti cip a tion or engage ment in a polit ical 
sense? Th e larger social context and the 
actual rami ﬁ c a tions for parti cip a tion and 
engage ment are complex and it is diﬃ   cult 
to gener al ize ﬁ nd ings focus ing on indi-
vidu als. While one can indeed point to 
studies indic at ing correl a tion between 
frequency of inter net use and civic engage-
ment, larger trends under mine overly 
optim istic conclu sions: ‘why is it that 
Internet use is at an all- time high while 
civic engage ment overall contin ues to 
decline?’ ( Greer 2008 ). 
 Engaging with this issue begins with 
the crit ical ques tion ing of terms like ‘digital 
native’, where tech no lo gical compet ence is 
equated with growing up in an envir on-
ment where digital devices are readily 
access ible. Th e ques tion of digital citizen-
ship in rela tion to youth – and why not 
consid er ing older people’s activ ism like the 
Spanish seniors organ iz ing in the ‘iaio-
ﬂ autas’ move ment 1 – needs to go beyond 
the ques tion of access and basic skills in 
order to inter rog ate people’s ‘capa city to 
project iden tit ies in collect ive spaces’ 
( Bennett 2007 ) and to develop an idea of 
how they engage polit ical prac tices and 
imagin ar ies without ignor ing the aﬀ ord-
ances of the medium. Th is includes the 
ques tion how move ments like Anonymous 
may func tion both as a gateway to polit ical 
activ ism and as an avenue for  slackt iv ism , 
the low- threshold illu sion of actual polit-
ical parti cip a tion ( Coleman 2013 ). 
 Infrastructure of Citizenship 
 Digital citizen ship, under stood in a wider 
and more funda mental sense than simply 
into contact with notions of the public 
sphere, in rela tion to Habermas or not 
( Calhoun 1993 ). 
 Th ese 
new 
public 
spheres 
and 
discourses are char ac ter ized by the emer-
gence and trans form a tions of modes of 
expres sion and commu nic a tion, as well as 
the struc tur ing of dissem in a tion, debate 
and produc tion of meaning through 
online plat forms (YouTube, Instagram, 
Twitter, Facebook, etc.) and the multi di-
men sional modes of circu la tion between 
them. Mobile tele phones allow for making 
photos and videos on the go, their manip u-
la tion through editing or visual ﬁ lters, 
instant sharing, comment ing and complex 
forms of order ing or collec tion- making. 
Other visual- narrat ive formats, such as 
inform a tion visu al iz a tion, web docu ment-
ar ies, etc. add to the prolif er a tion of  forms , 
the core char ac ter istic of which is their 
embed ded ness (hyper links, related items, 
comments, etc.) and the blur ring between 
recep tion and produc tion ( Kessler and 
Schäfer 2009 ). 
 The Making of Digital Citizens 
 New visual and textual forms of (self-)
expres sion and parti cip a tion aﬀ ect not only 
the polit ical land scape as such, but also the 
devel op ment 
of 
polit ical 
and 
civic 
subjectiv it ies. In this respect, citizen ship is 
frequently discussed in connec tion with 
youth and, in partic u lar, with the ques tion 
of how to ‘produce’ citizens, i.e. how to 
make sure that young people are learn ing 
the ethos and skills required for civic and 
polit ical parti cip a tion. Th e concept is oft en 
discussed in similar terms as the now less 
current notion of the ‘digital divide’: use, 
and in partic u lar compet ent use, deﬁ nes an 
in/out logic, where the oft en expli cit goal is 
to bring as many people as possible into the 
fold. Citizens are, in a sense, simply under-
stood as the func tion ing units of a liberal
(also) a prescrip tion. With Hume, one 
could say that it forces us to leave the ‘is’ for 
the uncom fort able domain of the ‘ought’. 
Here, we will need a new kind of ethical 
think ing that is up to the chal lenge (cf. 
 Braidotti 2013 ). 
 See also  Algorithmic Studies; Metadata 
Society; 
Organization 
in 
Platform 
Capitalism. 
 Note 
 1. See  http://www.iaio ﬂ autas.org 
 Bernhard Rieder 
 DIGITAL PHILOSOPHY  
 Th e expres sion  digital philo sophy is used to 
denote a number of theor et ical perspect-
ives concern ing the ulti mate nature of 
reality. Advocates of digital philo sophy 
main tain, via a variety of diﬀ er ent and 
oft en irre con cil able voices, that the 
universe is funda ment ally discrete. Th at it 
is, in fact, digital. Th e digital, accord ing to 
these views, is a univer sal iz ing onto lo gical 
prin ciple: a prin ciple that is believed to be 
oper at ive well beyond the tech no lo gical 
constraints of compu ta tional media, and 
which is held to char ac ter ize both mental 
states and phys ical entit ies as inform a-
tional and, there fore, as also comput able. 
 Th e origin of digital philo sophy can be 
traced back to the work of the computer 
pioneer Konrad Zuse. In the late 1960s, 
Zuse put forth the hypo thesis of a 
computa tion- based 
phys ical 
universe. 
Zuse believed that ‘objects and element ary 
dimen sions of physics must not be comple-
men ted by the concept of inform a tion but 
rather should be explained by it’ ( Zuse 
1993 : 176). Focusing on the oper a tions of 
cellu lar auto mata, 1 Zuse ( 1970 ) exten ded 
famili ar ity and daily use, requires us to 
inter rog ate tech no logy as a place where 
power and know ledge ﬁ nd mech an ized 
expres sions, and polit ics are circum scribed 
by partic u lar inter faces, inform a tion archi-
tec tures and modes of order ing. Th is 
means not only analysis and critique of the 
plat forms them selves, not only analysis of 
partic u lar polit ical moments that link to 
them, but also reﬂ ec tion on the design and 
produc tion of tools that shape human rela-
tions and exper i ence – in other words, we 
need to inter rog ate the infra struc ture of 
citizen ship and polit ics. 
 Th is needs to go hand in hand with a 
crit ical distance from what Morozov 
( 2013 ) calls ‘solu tion ism’, the belief that 
every social problem can and should be 
solved by tech no lo gical means. It is worth-
while to remem ber that ‘not all polit ical 
actors are indi vidual human agents: a wide 
variety of agents, or “actants” in Latour’s 
termin o logy, have polit ical eﬀ ects while 
not being polit ical subjects in any conven-
tional sense’ ( Karatzogianni and Schandorf 
2012 ). We need not go as far as think ing 
that, by produ cing partic u lar soft  ware 
designs, we are ‘coding freedom’ ( Coleman 
2012 ), but if soft  ware has become a crucial 
element in polit ical prac tice, the time for 
‘embed ding the human it ies in engin eer ing’ 
( Fisher and Mahajan 2010 ) has come. 
 New media envir on ments have not 
only accom mod ated forms of polit ical 
prac tice that are, ulti mately, direc ted 
towards eman cip a tion and polit ical parti-
cip a tion, they are also sites and agents in 
more brutal struggles, includ ing phenom-
ena such as state- sponsored censor ship, 
cyber war fare and the fully digital theatre 
of war of which the much- discussed drone 
ships are but one element. Th e notion of a 
‘moral ity of things’ ( Verbeek 2011 ) never 
becomes as tangible, as  insist ing , as in the 
prac tice of design ing a tech nical object 
that is never a mere descrip tion, but always
DIGITAL PHILOSOPHY 
Nature hypo thesis (see  Fredkin 1992 ) 
presumes that all things in nature, along 
with their prop er ties, can be shown to be 
discrete. Consequently, Fredkin argues 
that continu ity and inﬁ n ity are just illu-
sions, and that the past, present and future 
of the universe all evolve in a step- like 
fashion. In this respect, it is possible to say 
that digital philo sophy proposes an onto-
logy in which compu ta tion is seen as a sort 
of lowest common denom in ator for all 
that exists. It is possible to say, there fore, 
that at the core of digital philo sophy one 
ﬁ nds not only the system atic quant it at ive 
trans form a tion of the qual it at ive, and the 
belief that the imma ter ial will lead to the 
mater ial, but also a profound re- assess ment 
of the rela tion between simpli city and 
complex ity. 
 Th is is evident in the work of Stephen 
Wolfram ( 2002 ), who uses cellu lar auto-
mata to demon strate that, by follow ing 
basic discrete rules, very simple compu ta-
tional systems are capable of gener at ing 
increas ingly complex levels of beha viour 
over time. Wolfram extends these obser va-
tions to the universe itself, which he sees 
running on similar simple (and comput-
able) rules that gradu ally construct 
complex results. In this sense, Wolfram 
deﬁ nes his Principle of Computational 
Equivalence 
as 
explain ing 
empir ical 
phenom ena via the most funda mental 
hypo thesis: everything builds up from a 
simple level, and when a system has 
reached its own point of maximum 
complex ity, it should be considered to be as 
complex as anything else. Wolfram main-
tains that this prin ciple opens up a ‘new 
kind of science’ ( Wolfram 2002 ). In fact, for 
him it is a ‘new rule of nature’ (ibid.: 720) 
with ‘a quite unpre ced en ted array of 
implic a tions for science and scientiﬁ c 
think ing’ (5). Epistemologically speak ing, 
the prin ciple aims to prove the exist ence of 
an upper limit not only on the complex ity 
the latter’s discrete model of organ iz a tion 
to the struc ture of the cosmos, and 
advanced the thesis that the entire universe 
is nothing but the output of a determ in istic 
compu ta tion. Today, digital philo sophy 
draws in part on Zuse’s insights to develop 
a diverse body of theor ies that hold that 
there is a funda mental inform a tional and 
quant it at ive prin ciple under ly ing the 
universe, which processes the latter’s evol-
u tion in real time. 
 To a greater or lesser extent, this sort of 
Aristotelian prime mover has been iden ti-
ﬁ ed in terms of a compu ta tional mech an-
ism. Some see it as a discrete system similar 
to a cellu lar auto maton (see  Fredkin 2003 ; 
 Wolfram 2002 ); others view it as a quantum 
compu ta tional process (see  Lloyd 2007 ; 
 Deutsch 1997 ), or as a univer sal Turing 
machine 
(see 
 Schmidhuber 
1997 ). 
Generally, however, all of these perspect-
ives consider inform a tion to be more 
funda mental than matter and energy. Th e 
notion of compu ta tion, in turn, comes to 
the fore as a concept that super sedes both 
math em at ics and physics: it is viewed as a 
prin ciple or as a cause, or indeed as ‘a phys-
ical activ ity’ ( Toﬀ oli 1982 : 165), that might 
be able to account for what the theor et ical 
phys i cist John Archibald Wheeler has 
called ‘it from bit’ ( 1990 : 310). 
 Digital philo sophy main tains that, ‘if 
our universe is digital, then all the things in 
it are too, includ ing human bodies and 
brains’ ( Steinhart 2004 : 183). It there fore 
holds that compu ta tion is not just a tool to 
simu late reality, but rather the onto lo gical 
ground of reality itself. Th is claim is 
advanced expli citly by the computer 
scient ist Edward Fredkin, who is perhaps 
one of the most radical proponents of 
digital philo sophy (and who gave it its 
name). For Fredkin, phys ical laws are 
nothing but algorithms or on/oﬀ  instruc-
tions, and subatomic particles are nothing 
but units of binary inform a tion. His Finite
Algorithmic Information Th eory, arguing 
that the complex ity of a law is to be meas-
ured by compar ing it with the complex ity 
of the data that this law attempts to account 
for (see  Chaitin 2006b  and  2006c ). 
According to Chaitin, a rule must be 
simpler than the outcome of its applic a-
tion. In this respect, a law truly explains 
some thing only if its input is concise whilst 
its output is not. Chaitin consequently 
applies his algorithmic theory of inform a-
tion to biology (for example, he makes 
 DNA  the simple input that gener ates a 
complex organ ism as its output; see 
 Chaitin 2012 ), and to the devel op ment of 
everything that exists. ‘All is algorithm’, 
he claims (2007: 235), for the essence of 
objects is to be conveyed by the shortest 
program able to express that object’s 
inform a tional content. In this view, it is 
compu ta tional processing, rather than 
math em at ical equa tions, that can best 
describe the real: in Chaitin’s theory there 
is no formal reduc tion to static and eternal 
perfec tion, 
but 
rather 
an 
oper at ive 
compres sion, which leaves room for the 
compre hen sion of the dynam ism of 
empir ical phenom ena. 
 Digital philo sophy might well be ‘a new 
way of think ing about how things work’ 
( Fredkin 2003 : 189), yet many devel op-
ments in science and tech no logy have 
made this digital cosmo logy possible. 
Digital philo sophy can be seen to have 
grown out of the twen ti eth- century 
 technos cientiﬁ c belief that inform a tion 
is essen tial to the universe, and to attest 
to the fact that the computer is ‘a 
new 
and 
funda mental 
philo soph ical 
concept’ ( Chaitin 2006b : 11). Whether this 
concept should be taken as a meta phor 
or (as digital philo sophy main tains) as 
reveal ing 
univer sal iz ing 
meta phys ical 
truths remains open to debate. 
 One possible objec tion to digital philo-
sophy follows from consid er ing that other 
of possible real- life compu ta tions, but also 
on the heur istic capa cit ies of science. Our 
most power ful compu ta tional tools, then, 
are just as power ful as the natural phenom-
ena that they are inten ded to model. In 
Wolfram’s view, however, it also follows 
from the Principle of Computational 
Equivalence that the natural is not super-
ior to the arti ﬁ  cial, because algorithms can 
do anything that life does. 
 Digital philo sophy is an orient a tion in 
contem por ary science, yet its consid er a-
tion of the phys ical nature of beings aims 
to say some thing about the meta phys ical 
nature of Being. From a histor ical perspect-
ive, because of its search for an origin or a 
unique source of exist ence and becom ing, 
this digital meta phys ics recalls pre-
Socratic philo sophies. Moreover, when 
tracing a gene a lo gical traject ory for digital 
philo sophy, one should also include 
Pythagoras’ belief that number is the 
unify ing prin ciple of the real, Democritus’ 
atomism, Zeno’s demon stra tion of the 
contra dic tions of continu ity, and Galileo’s 
descrip tion of the universe as written in a 
code that needs to be deciphered. However, 
there can be little doubt that the most 
import ant philo soph ical refer ence for 
digital onto lo gists is Leibniz. Despite its 
many vari ants, digital philo sophy can be 
seen as a contem por ary re- elab or a tion of 
Leibniz’s monad o logy of discrete and self- 
contained units of being. Digital philo-
sophy’s monist meta phys ics is meant to 
oﬀ er an answer to the Leibnizian ques tion 
of ‘why is there some thing rather than 
nothing’ ( Leibniz 1989a : 210). It does so by 
propos ing, in a Leibnizian spirit, a world 
that is ‘the simplest in hypo thesis’ but ‘the 
richest in phenom ena’ ( Leibniz 1989b : 39). 
 Th e math em atician Gregory Chaitin 
has openly acknow ledged that ‘digital 
philo sophy is Leibnizian’ (2007: 236). 
Chaitin pays tribute to Leibnizian ideas on 
complex ity 
and 
random ness 
in 
his
DIGITAL RUBBISH 
Extended Cognition; Plasticity; Postimage; 
Robophilosophy.
form. Electronic tech no lo gies inform the 
types of rela tions, prac tices, exper i ences 
and becom ings of human and non- human 
entit ies. 
 At the same time, it is not just through 
the making but also through the break ing 
of elec tron ics that partic u lar worlds come 
into being. Electronic waste is the fastest- 
growing waste stream, since given the 
rapid obsol es cence of elec tron ics the 
number of discarded tech no lo gies prolif-
er ates in equal measure to the new devices 
intro duced. While ‘matter ing’ is oft en 
approached as a process of things coming 
into being ( Barad 2003 ; cf.  Dolphijn and 
van der Tuin 2012 ), matter ing also occurs 
through the dissol u tion of things and the 
residue and fallout left  behind, as well as 
the new fossils that are formed ( Gabrys 
2006 ,  2011 ). From these remain ders, new 
mater ial condi tions, human and non- 
human entit ies, as well as envir on ments 
and techno- geograph ies form. 
 While the infra struc tures, resources 
and mater ial require ments that under gird 
digital media tech no lo gies are oft en over-
looked, a posthu man encounter with these 
tech no lo gies then indic ates that these are 
not seem ingly dema ter i al ized gadgets 
bound only to human users, but rather are 
expan ded mater ial- ecolo gical concret iz a-
tions and processes. Digital media tech no-
lo gies are mater ial in multiple ways, but 
waste reveals most poignantly just how 
mater ial these devices are. Digital tech no-
lo gies create wastes across the life cycle of 
manu fac ture, consump tion, repair and 
disposal. Th ese wastes are toxic, diﬃ   cult to 
clas sify, leaking and amorph ous, relat ively 
unseen, dispro por tion ate in compar ison 
to the size of the devices, product ive of 
envir on mental and labour injustices, 
contam in at ing of bodies, carci no genic, 
and pollut ing of soil and aquifers. 
 As this sprawl ing yet far from compre -
hensive list of elec tron ics- related wastes 
mater ial- ecolo gical arrange ments, exceed 
a human- centric approach to tech no logy 
or ecology. Th e wastes from digital media 
give rise to new and posthu man techno- 
ecolo gies in the making. 
 ‘Digital rubbish’ is the term I use to 
invest ig ate 
the 
partic u lar 
mater ial 
processes and modes of matter ing char ac-
ter istic of elec tronic waste ( Gabrys 2011 ). 
Th e common percep tion of digital tech no-
lo gies is that they are relat ively light and 
resource- free, and that they are dema ter i-
al ized in rela tion to other tech no lo gies and 
indus tries. However, elec tron ics require 
consid er able resources for their manu fac-
ture, and from the mining of miner als and 
metals for the essen tial oper a tion of micro-
chips and mobile phones, through to the 
use of numer ous chem ical solvents to etch 
circuit boards, to the increas ing rates of 
consump tion of elec tron ics as well as the 
elec tron iciz a tion of envir on ments, homes 
and trans port through the ‘Internet of 
Th ings’ ( Gabrys 2016b ) and the increas ing 
disposal of short- lived elec tron ics, whether 
for scrapyards, repair shops in devel op ing 
coun tries or land ﬁ lls, it is evident that the 
modes of matter ing in which elec tron ics 
are entangled gener ate intens ive and 
extens ive envir on mental, polit ical and 
social rela tions. 
 From sensors to smart grids to mobile 
phones, elec tron ics are remak ing the 
planet. 
Th ese 
‘techno- geograph ies’ 
( Simondon 1958 ) gener ate new mater i al it-
ies and milieus in and through which 
human and nonhu man processes unfold 
( Gabrys 2016a ). Such elec tronic techno- 
geograph ies might also be approached as 
forming distinct posthu man condi tions, 
where the partic u lar concret iz a tions of 
tech no lo gies, humans, nonhu mans and 
milieus are not centred on or through a 
pre- exist ing human subject, but become 
constitutive of the possib il it ies for exper i-
en cing subjects and for new worlds to
DIGITAL RUBBISH 
produce new organ isms and rela tions, 
which can be harmful in their eﬀ ects (as 
the rice contam in ated with heavy metal at 
the begin ning of this entry indic ates). 
Digital rubbish then suggests not only that 
we might attend to the over looked mater i-
al it ies and mater ial rela tions of these tech-
no lo gies, but also that we develop an 
expan ded approach to these mater i al it ies 
that does not settle on a fascin a tion with 
the ruins of consump tion, merely, but 
that creates new mater ial explor a tions 
and mater ial prac tices that address the 
splin ter ing and complex inputs, outputs 
and posthu man trans form a tions that 
accom pany our techno- ecolo gical digital 
lives. 
 See also Mattering; General Ecology; 
Obsolete Technologies; Noise. 
 Jennifer Gabrys 
indic ates, the modes of matter ing to which 
digital media tech no lo gies contrib ute are 
multiple. Which is to say that digital 
rubbish is gener at ive of more than just 
obvious mater ial remain ders in the form 
of discarded hard drives and computer 
monit ors. Instead, digital rubbish is gener-
at ive of processes of mater i al iz a tion that 
splinter oﬀ  in multiple direc tions depend-
ing upon whether elec tron ics are being 
manu fac tured, miner als are being mined 
for their internal work ings, or cast- oﬀ 
personal computers are circu lat ing to 
land ﬁ lls or processing plants. To focus on 
these mater ial aspects of digital rubbish is 
to commit to a partic u lar mater ial- polit ical 
and ecolo gical construc tion ( Stengers 
2008 ) of the eﬀ ect of these tech no lo gies. 
 While elec tron ics continue to prolif er-
ate, and seem to oﬀ er up newfound levels 
of speed, eﬃ   ciency and productiv ity, 
they at the same time gener ate mater ial- 
polit ical and envir on mental prob lems that 
are distinctly posthu man in char ac ter.
did – or what cyber cul ture then rehashed 
with a dose of Silicon Valley excite ment – 
but the diﬀ er ent visu al iz a tion systems that 
give us oper a tional repres ent a tions of the 
planet. Th is is the view of the Earth since 
the  Vostok I space ﬂ ight in 1961 carrying: 
the ﬁ rst human to orbit the planet and able 
to describe the ground- detached view. It’s 
the Earth that features on the cover of the 
ﬁ rst  Whole Earth Catalog in 1968, and on 
the inside pages hailing the imagery of the 
satel lite era: the neces sary coﬀ ee table 
book of 243  NASA  images, in full colour, 
from the Gemini ﬂ ights in 1965 – for only 
$7. Th e Earth furnishes the home. 
 Our under stand ing of the Earth is 
medi ated by a variety of repres ent a tional 
tech niques and is itself a product of the 
tech no lo gical era. ‘Th ey alone shall possess 
the earth who live  from the powers of the 
cosmos’, quoted Walter Benjamin ( 2008 : 
58) in his short text ‘To the Planetarium’ 
from 1928, analys ing tech no lo gical ways of 
organ iz ing the  physis  – both the gaze 
upwards, and from up there, back down-
wards. Th e satel lite- based images of the 
Earth since the 1960s and leading up to the 
famous Blue Marble of 1972 (the  Apollo 17 
ﬂ ight) mark subsequent examples in the 
series of images that deﬁ ne the Earth from 
space. Th e escape velo city ( Virilio 1997 ) 
that allows accel er at ing objects from aero-
planes to space ships to leave the Earth’s 
gravity- bound surface is also what then 
allows us to see the Earth from above. Th e 
old etymo logy of the Earth as  eorþe , refer-
ring to some thing diﬀ er ent from the 
 EARTH  
 Th e Earth is a planet, of an age of about 
4.54 billion years and deﬁ ned by its 
geolo gical form a tions, density, biosphere, 
hydro sphere and an atmo sphere that 
sustains life. It is more than a world for 
humans and deﬁ ned by its life- sustain ing 
condi tions and its plan et ary rela tions 
( Woodard 2015 ). On a plan et ary level, 
it is one complex dynamic system where 
biosphere, atmo sphere and many of the 
geolo gical spheres inter act; on an extra- 
plan et ary level it is as dynamic, part of 
the grav it a tional pull, peri odic rota tion, 
cosmic rays and the radi ation of the sun. 
Buckminster Fuller called it ‘space ship 
earth’, marking the spec u lat ive begin nings 
of post- plan et ary design: ‘We are all astro-
nauts’ ( Fuller 1969 : 14), who spin in space 
trav el ling at 60,000 miles an hour, in the 
midst of rich non- human life as well as the 
intens ive rela tions to other planets and 
the sun. 
 Th e Earth is also a complex ecosys tem 
where one should never mistake humans 
to be the centre of action; they are merely 
one part in a larger loop of processes. One 
way to refer to it is by way of a ‘holarchy 
arisen from the self- induced synergy of 
combin a tion, inter fa cing, and recom bin a-
tion’ ( Margulis and Sagan 1995 :18). 
 Besides the life of the organic and the 
inor ganic spheres, it is also a medi a s phere 
– by which we don’t have to think only of 
the Jesuit fantas ies of the imma ter ial reality 
of cogni tion such as Teilhard de Chardin 
 E
EARTH 
heavens and the under ground, gives way to 
a dynamic of vectors where the Earth 
becomes deﬁ ned from the heavens. Th e 
ener getic powers of accel er a tion trans form 
into the visual survey from above. As Fuller 
puts it, writing in the late 1960s, ‘However, 
you have viewed more than did pre- 
twen ti eth- century man, for in his entire 
life time he saw only one- millionth of the 
Earth’s surface’ ( Fuller 1969 ). Th is media- 
enhanced under stand ing of the Earth 
seeps into the biolo gical work of Margulis 
and Sagan even, when they narrate the new 
meta morph osis of visual epistem o logy 
that this tech no lo gical thrust ing and 
imaging brings about. It brings forth an 
imagin ary of the orbital that is shared by 
satel lites and astro nauts: ‘As if ﬂ oat ing 
dream ily away from your own body, you 
watch the planet to which you are now 
tied by only the invis ible umbil icus of 
gravity and tele com mu nic a tion’ ( Margulis 
and Sagan 1995 : 18). Th ey use such images 
and narrat ives to contrib ute to the idea of a 
holarchic view where the human is part of 
the micro- and macro cosmos. For them, 
the event is a sort of a plan et ary- level 
mirror image that carries Jacques Lacan’s 
concept from babies to space: to perceive 
‘the global envir on ment’ as the ‘mirror 
stage of our entire species’ (ibid.). 
 Much more than an echo of a psycho-
ana lytic stage for the plan et ary design, the 
medi ated vision turned back on the Earth 
itself was instru mental to a range of polit-
ical, scientiﬁ c and milit ary consid er a tions. 
Seeing the Earth from space was one such 
thing that had an eﬀ ect on climate research 
(also impacted by nuclear testing; see 
 Edwards 2010 ). It had an eﬀ ect on milit ary 
plan ning and geopol it ical eval u ation. It 
opened up again a holistic view of the 
planet as one, although at the same time 
as a complex system of a non- linear 
kind. It contrib uted to a variety of cultural 
moods and move ments. Even the gaze 
to the other worldly away from the Earth 
was a way to sharpen the focus on the 
planet but the tech no lo gical gaze toward 
deep space with tele scopes such as Hubble 
was never just about space and the 
inter plan et ary. 
 Geographical surveys beneﬁ ted from 
the developed lenses and image processing 
of satel lite- enabled remote sensing ( Cubitt 
1998 : 45–9). Th e perspect ive back to the 
Earth has enabled the ﬁ ne- tuning accur acy 
of corpor ate digital maps such as Google 
Earth and a massive milit ary surveil lance 
system too. 
 Th e Earth is constantly targeted by 
satel lites and remote sensing systems such 
as the Planetary Skin Institute. Th e insti-
tute is one among many systems that oﬀ er 
a poly scalar view of a multi pli city of 
processes for analysis. It boasts the ideal of 
reading these as ‘scal able big data’ that 
bene ﬁ ts communit ies and can ‘increase, 
food, water, and energy secur ity and 
protect key ecosys tems and biod iversity’ 
(quoted in  Bishop 2016 ). Alongside such 
systems as Hewlett Packard’s Central 
Nervous System for the Earth (Ce NSE ) it 
creates real- time surveil lance systems that 
intend more than mere obser va tion. As 
Ryan Bishop ( 2016 ) argues, these are 
massive level systems for constant data- 
based inter pret a tion of the various scales 
of the Earth that indeed deﬁ ne a speciﬁ c 
corpor ate- secur ity angle to the planet. 
 Our rela tions with the Earth are medi-
ated through tech no lo gies and tech niques 
of visu al iz a tion, soni ﬁ c a tion, calcu la tion, 
mapping, predic tion, simu la tion and so 
forth: it is primar ily through oper a tion al-
ized media that we grasp the Earth as an 
object of analysis. Even the surface of the 
Earth and geolo gical resources used to be 
mapped through surveys and ﬁ eld obser va-
tion. But now this advances through remote 
sensing tech no lo gies (see also  Parikka 
2015 ). One can argue that they are in a way
(MATERIAL) ECOCRITICISM
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
exten sions of Leibniz’s univer sal calcu lus, 
which oﬀ ered one way to account for the 
order of the Earth, includ ing acci dents 
like earth quakes (such as the infam ous one 
in 1755 in Lisbon). But as the archi tect- 
theor ist Eyal Weizman argues, this calcu la-
tion of the Earth is now less organ ized 
accord ing to the divine order of the 
Christian deity and more about the ‘increas-
ingly complex bureau cracy of calcu la tions 
that include sensors in the subsoil, terrain, 
air, and sea, all processed by algorithms and 
their attend ant models’ ( Weizman, Davis 
and Turpin 2013 : 64). Also prac tices of 
meteor o logy are to be under stood as such 
cultural tech niques and media oper a tions 
that order the dynam ics of the sky as analys-
able data. Th e terrestrial opens up through 
what circu lates above it, the atmo sphere 
becomes a way to under stand the ground 
and the orbit is where the under stand ing of 
the Earth begins by way of massive data- 
driven remote sensing systems. Th e  nomos 
of the Earth that deﬁ nes its geopol it ics is 
one that reaches out to the heav enly spheres 
as much as to the data- intens ive oper a tions 
of multiple scales (see Bratton 2015). 
 See also Anthropocene; Anthropocene 
Observatory; Four Elements; General 
Ecology; Geomythologies; Terrestrial;  SS = 
Security/Surveillance; Medianatures. 
 Jussi Parikka 
 (MATERIAL) ECOCRITICISM  
 ‘We need to make some connec tions 
between liter at ure and the sun, between 
teach ing liter at ure and the health of the 
biosphere’ ( Rueckert 1996 [1978] : 109). 
With these words, coming as an outburst 
of discon tent for the absence of  bios from 
liter ary criti cism, William Rueckert was 
adding a crucial sign post in the direc tion 
of the ecolo gical human it ies. It was the 
end of the 1970s, and until then the 
planet’s bio- geo-chemical cycles, non- 
human beings, elements, the Earth and the 
Sun, had notice ably been the ‘stone guests’ 
of liter ary studies. Almost consist ently, 
they were treated as  subjects but bereft  of 
subjectiv ity –  symbol ic ally present but 
absent as concrete entit ies, mater ial actors. 
Still, Rueckert’s point was, the world in 
which we teach and study liter at ure, the 
world in which liter at ure is made, is the 
same world in which humans, along with 
innu mer able other species and beings, live. 
What phys ic ally aﬀ ects this world, aﬀ ects 
all the activ it ies happen ing in it, includ ing 
our intel lec tual and cultural produc tions. 
Even more, all these cultural produc tions 
do not spring out from the void, but  emerge 
in the process of our evol u tion as living 
things. And so, like the simplest one- cell 
organ isms, this expres sion of life that we 
call ‘liter at ure’ ulti mately depends on the 
energy provided by the sun; like them, it is 
intrins ic ally at home in the biosphere. 
 A crit ical prac tice meant to under stand 
the role of liter at ure ‘in an immensely 
complex global system in which energy, 
matter,  and ideas inter act’ ( Glotfelty 1996 : 
xix), ecocriti cism is an incite ment to 
consider ‘culture’ not as apart from ‘nature’, 
but to see nature and culture, world and 
text, as mutu ally permeable. In its numer-
ous methods and forms – encom passing 
or inter twin ing with femin ist approaches 
and nature writing analyses, animal 
human it ies and biose mi ot ics, envir on-
mental justice and post co lo nial studies, 
petro criti cism and ‘toxic discourse’ – 
ecocriti cism invites us to see how world 
and texts are connec ted, how they meet 
and even tu ally combine. 
 Th is can mean many things. For example, 
it means to examine how liter ary creations 
mirror the ecolo gies of the ‘outside world’, or 
how they cultur ally respond to the crises
(MATERIAL) ECOCRITICISM 
aﬀ ect ing these ecolo gies. But it can also 
mean another inter est ing thing, namely, 
that the world itself becomes a  text  in which 
these crises, along with all the cross ings of 
nature and culture, are scrip ted. Th is idea of 
the ‘world as a text’ is not to be inter preted 
in the radical decon struc tion ist sense, 
implied by Derrida’s oft en- misun der stood 
asser tion there is no ‘ hors- texte ’. Rather, it 
suggests that the world’s complex ity can be 
seen as a story emer ging from the process of 
becom ing- together of nature and culture – 
and that it is only think able as their inex-
tric able co- emer gence:  nature cul ture . 
 Based on these premises, the encounter 
of ecocriti cism with posthu man ism is a 
coher ent upshot. As Serpil Oppermann 
writes, ‘With their inter sect ing stories and 
theor ies, posthu man ism and ecocriti cism 
have some thing in common: they intro duce 
changes in the way mater i al ity, agency, and 
nature are conceived’ ( Oppermann 2016 ). 
Th at this is neces sar ily conﬂ u ent with a 
vision that, like the posthu man ist view, is 
meant to over come our ‘historic’ solitude, is 
palp able: in line with posthu man ism, in 
fact, ecocriti cism and the liter ary imagin a-
tion it heeds augment the popu la tion of our 
cultural world, relo cat ing the human in a 
wider web of connec tions by staging a 
‘perform at ive meta phor that allows for 
other wise unlikely encoun ters and unsus-
pec ted
(MATERIAL) ECOCRITICISM
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
and express ing the inter ac tions of human 
and non- human actors. A  mater ial eco-
criticism becomes in this way an attempt to 
elicit the impli cit message of this worldly 
textu al ity, using liter ary repres ent a tions as 
prisms to possibly bring out the predic a-
ments of the more- than-human collect ives 
in which our lives are embed ded. 
 A key role is played by the concept of 
diﬀ rac tion, here employed to read concepts 
and bodies ‘through one another in ways 
that help illu min ate diﬀ er ences as they 
emerge’ ( Barad 2007 : 30). As Karen Barad 
suggests, in order to think the natural and 
the cultural together, without ‘holding 
either nature or culture as the ﬁ xed refer-
ence for under stand ing the other’, we need 
‘a diﬀ rac tion appar atus’ (ibid.). Material 
ecocriti cism’s object ive is that of working 
as a ‘diﬀ rac tion appar atus’ to see these 
entan gle ments; it wants to act as a crit-
ical lens that enables us to think the natural 
through the cultural and the cultural 
through the natural, remind ing us of the 
‘compos i tional’ struc ture of our world 
( Latour 2010a ) – a  common world of mani-
fold beings and alien aﬃ  n it ies, a ‘pluri verse 
. . . traversed by hetero gen eit ies that are 
continu ally  doing things ’ ( Bennett 2010 : 
122). Th e concept of diﬀ rac tion also 
consid er ably aﬀ ects the idea of inter pret a-
tion ( Iovino 2015 ). In fact, just like the 
pres ence of the exper i menter contrib utes 
to determ ine the beha viour of the 
subatomic particles in a quantum exper i-
ment, the inter preter’s pres ence contrib-
utes to the agency of the inter preted text 
( Oppermann 2015 ). Even if matter is per 
se endowed with agency, the  narrat ive 
agency of matter acquires its meaning and 
deﬁ n i tion chieﬂ y through a reader. Th is 
prac tice of ‘reading’ is our parti cip a tion in 
the world’s ‘diﬀ er en tial becom ing’ and is 
itself respons ible for craft  ing further levels 
of reality; it is, as Wendy Wheeler says 
about the processes of semi osis and inter-
pret a tion which char ac ter ize life, ‘fed back 
into [the] world . . . produ cing new layers 
or strata of under stand ing’ (2008:154). 
 Seen in this light, ‘inter preter’ has here 
two mean ings, which are comple ment ary to 
one another: the ﬁ rst is ‘reader’; the second 
is ‘actor’. Interpreting their objects, ecocrit-
ics  read them into being: they liter ally voice 
their objects, contrib ut ing to create narrat-
ives about them, also emphas iz ing that the 
world’s textu al ity is a reci pro city through 
which human and non-hu man agents are 
constitutive of the reality we know. But 
ecocrit ics  act , too. Th ey carry on a more or 
less expli cit (in any case, ines cap able) form 
of cultural activ ism. Th ere is, in other words, 
no neut ral ity in exper i en cing, knowing and 
telling a story: if, as Barad again says, ‘we are 
a part of that nature that we seek to under-
stand’ ( Barad 2007 : 67), the way we exhibit 
this under stand ing belongs in the process 
of becom ing of this very reality. Every inter-
pret a tion is there fore an act of medi ation 
between text and cogni tion, essen tial to 
the  use of such text: in the congeal ing of 
discurs ive and mater ial factors which 
origin ate reality in all of its forms, inter pre-
t ive prac tices are ‘a mater ial prac tice for 
making a diﬀ er ence’ ( Barad 2007 : 381). Th is 
process has ethical and cognit ive outcomes, 
in that it not only relo cates the horizon of 
human action into a more complex and 
inter con nec ted geography of subjects and 
forces, but also enables ways of seeing that 
compel new posthu man ethics and less 
destruct ive beha viours. To  read bodies and 
land scapes as the storied embod i ments of 
count less intra- acting agen cies – pollut ants, 
polit ical choices, non/human creativ it ies, 
and natural dynam ics – might indeed reveal 
unex pec ted prox im it ies which prompt us to 
redesign the maps of agency and respons i-
b il ity, thus creat ing a deeper aware ness in 
matter of ‘sustain ab il ity’. 
 Like its conson ant approach ‘elemental 
ecocriti cism’ ( Cohen and Duckert 2015a ),
ECOHORROR 
to think the world ‘disan thro po centric ally’, 
to use Cohen’s insight ful coinage (2013b: 
xxiv). To ‘anthropo- dis-center’ our sight 
means to liter ally swerve our prior it ies, 
liber at ing the world’s bodily natures from 
the discurs ive – and mater ial – delu sions 
of human- centred narrat ives. In our ‘post- 
geolo gical’ epoch – call it Anthropocene, 
Plantationocene or Capitalocene ( Haraway 
2015a ,  2015b ) – the crit ical tools of (mater-
ial) ecocriti cism can be usefully compli cit 
in the ‘joint eﬀ orts and collect ive imagin-
ings’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 197) neces sary to this 
veering move. 
 See also Diﬀ raction; Ecomaterialism; 
Mattering; 
Naturecultures; 
Neo/New 
Materialism; Ontological Turn; Storied 
Matter; Trans- corpor eal ity; Literature of 
Liberation; Material Feminisms; Posthuman 
Critical Th eory. 
 Serenella Iovino 
 ECOHORROR  
 Ecohorror is a relat ively newly delin eated 
subgenre of horror that never the less has 
deep roots in the genre. If horror is a genre 
about fear, concerned with explor ing what 
fright ens us and perhaps tempor ar ily exor-
cising or taming that fear, ecohor ror is a 
genre that deals with our fears and anxi et ies 
about the envir on ment. It grows out of and 
includes narrat ives that have been referred 
to, vari ously, as natural horror, creature 
features, and ‘nature strikes back’ narrat ives, 
in which the central narrat ive is frequently 
one of some element of the natural world 
attack ing human ity. Classic examples of this 
narrat ive include  Th em! ( 1954 ), in which 
spiders mutated by atomic testing in the 
New Mexico desert must be defeated, 
Alfred Hitchcock’s  Th e Birds ( 1963 ), in 
which birds attack humans for no discern-
ible reason, and Steven Spielberg’s  Jaws 
( 1975 ), in which a great white shark terror-
izes a New England coastal community, also 
with no obvious reason. While  Th em! 
presents its creatures as the direct result of 
human inter ven tion,  Th e Birds  and  Jaws 
present their attack ing animals simply as 
instances of nature’s Otherness. More recent 
examples of this type of ecohor ror narrat ive 
can be found in creature features from the 
Syfy Channel and low- budget produc tion 
company Th e Asylum, includ ing, for 
instance,  Mega Shark Vs. Giant Octopus 
( 2009 ),  Sharktopus ( 2010 ) and  Sharknado 
( 2013 ). Th e subgenre isn’t just about sharks, 
of course, although sharks (whether 
modern or prehis toric) are a popular choice. 
Other modern examples feature piran has, 
spiders, birds, crocodiles or alligators, bears, 
rats, snakes, and some times even bugs. 
 Many of the modern creature features 
are campy and diﬃ   cult to take seri ously, but 
they never the less reﬂ ect real anxi et ies about 
the natural world and its exist ence outside 
of human control. Th is anxiety is high-
lighted by such ﬁ lms’ simil ar it ies to other 
types of horror. In her blog  Horror 
Homeroom , horror scholar Dawn Keetley 
argues that  Jaws is essen tially a slasher ﬁ lm 
featur ing a shark instead of a masked 
human murderer; further more, she writes, 
‘Whether they render it in shark or human 
form, though, both  Jaws and  Halloween 
disclose the terri fy ing confront a tion with 
the nonhu man (the inex plic able, irra tional, 
and implac able) at the heart of horror.’ Th is 
confront a tion with the nonhu man is central 
to ecohor ror. 
 Ecohorror is not limited to the ‘nature 
strikes back’ narrat ive, however. Stephen 
Rust and Carter Soles provide an expan-
ded deﬁ n i tion of the genre in their intro-
duc tion to a special cluster of articles about 
ecohor ror in  Interdisciplinary Studies in 
Literature and Environment ( ISLE ), writing
that this larger deﬁ n i tion ‘includes analyses 
of texts in which horriﬁ c texts and tropes 
are used to promote ecolo gical aware ness, 
repres ent ecolo gical crises, or blur human/
non- human distinc tions more broadly’ 
(2014: 509–10). Ecohorror, they continue, 
‘assumes that envir on mental disrup tion is 
haunt ing human ity’s rela tion ship to the 
non- human world’ (510). Th is deﬁ n i tion of 
ecohor ror broadens the genre’s scope both 
in terms of what texts it might include as 
well as in terms of its relev ance to theor ies 
of the posthu man. 
 Th is expan ded deﬁ n i tion means that 
ecohor ror appears not just as a distinct 
subgenre of horror but as an eﬀ ect that may 
surface within other horror narrat ives as 
well. One instance of its envir on mental 
disrup tion can be found in taxi dermy’s 
pres ence in horror ﬁ lm. Animal taxi dermy 
repeatedly recurs within the genre, although 
it usually remains in the back ground, only 
brieﬂ y atten ded to (if at all), as in  Th e Blob 
( 1958 ),  Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ), 
 Frogs ( 1972 ),  Th e Exorcist ( 1973 ),  Dawn of 
the Dead ( 1978 ),  Willard ( 2003 ),  Shark 
Night 3D ( 2011 ), and  Cabin in the Woods 
( 2012 ). Rachel Poliquin writes, ‘All taxi-
dermy begs the ques tion, what is it? Perhaps 
we no longer wonder  what species the 
preserved creature once was, but the onto lo-
gical ques tion  what is it? Is always lurking 
with taxi dermy’ (2012: 38). Th ese ques tions 
do not apply only to the taxi dermy itself; 
taxi dermy’s pres ence evokes these ques tions 
in a more general sense and high lights 
horror’s already exist ing anxi et ies about the 
nonhu man, death and the lines between 
categor ies such as human/non- human, life/
death and animate/inan im ate. Furthermore, 
taxi dermy in horror evokes Mel Y. Chen’s 
animacy hier archy, in which some types of 
life or being are valued more highly than 
others (with sentient life at the top of the 
hier archy and inan im ate objects at the 
bottom). Chen describes the oppos ite of 
animacy as ‘the inan im ate, dead ness, 
lowness, nonhu man animals (rendered as 
insensate), the abject, the object’ (2012: 30). 
Taxidermied animals illus trate this end of 
the scale, as do many horror ﬁ lm monsters 
(zombies, vampires, animal monsters), 
while the humans who star in the ﬁ lms exist 
at the oppos ite end of the animacy hier-
archy. Applying Chen’s animacy hier archy 
helps reveal both the value system the 
audi ence brings to such narrat ives and also 
the break down of this value system in these 
ﬁ lms. Th is break down can be seen clearly 
in  Night of the Living Dead. Surrounded 
and over whelmed by creatures and objects 
lower on the animacy hier archy than 
they are (i.e., zombies), the human char ac-
ters (and their animate superi or ity) are 
destroyed and their place on the hier archy is 
revealed to be extremely unstable. Th us 
taxi dermy in horror ﬁ lm serves the broader 
func tions of ecohor ror, blur ring the lines 
between human and nonhu man. 
 Th is blur ring of lines can be taken even 
further within ecohor ror. Although discus-
sions of ecohor ror have oft en emphas ized 
attacks by the natural world or inva sions 
‘from our imme di ate natural envir on ment’ 
( Tudor 1989 : 62), this emphasis is built 
upon a presumed separ a tion between 
human ity and the non- human world. 
Human and non- human are not separ ate, 
however, so it is crucial to also consider 
ecohor ror narrat ives that examine the 
connec tions between the two. Th is means 
blur ring the lines between ecohor ror and 
body horror. In  Th e Fly ( 1986 ), for instance, 
the horror comes not only from Seth 
Brundle’s bodily disin teg ra tion over the 
course of the ﬁ lm but also from the disin-
teg ra tion of the bound ar ies between 
human and ﬂ y. And in Junji Ito’s manga 
 Uzumaki (1998–99), in which a Japanese 
village is contam in ated by spirals, the 
horror comes both from the way human 
bodies are twisted and changed by the
ECOLOGIES OF ARCHITECTURE 
of some humans into snail people. 
 Another source for this kind of eco -
hor ror is the para site- focused horror nar rat-
ive. Th ese para site- focused horror narra tives 
(e.g., Mira Grant’s novel  Parasite and its 
sequels) draw atten tion to the ways in which 
humans wish to see them selves as in control 
of their bodies, their lives and even the 
natural world, while simul tan eously high-
light ing the limits of this control. Aft er all, 
we are inﬂ u enced – some times signi ﬁ c antly 
– by the organ isms living within us. Th is 
inclu sion of para site narra t ives within 
ecohor ror high lights the subgenre’s connec-
tion to the posthu man. If posthu man ism is 
a mode ‘in which there are no solid demarc-
a tions between human and animal and in 
which the human is coex tens ive with the 
emer gent natural/cultural world’ ( Alaimo 
2010 : 151), then para site narrat ives certainly 
reﬂ ect this. Because this blur ring of lines 
takes place within the horror genre, however, 
the lack of such solid demarc a tions is not 
neces sarily repres en ted as a posit ive thing; 
instead, these narrat ives ask their readers or 
viewers to consider the dangers of such 
inter con nec ted ness ( Tidwell 2014 ). As 
Donna Haraway writes, ‘[a] great deal is at 
stake in such meet ings [between species], 
and outcomes are not guar an teed. Th ere is 
no tele olo gical warrant here, no assured 
happy or unhappy ending, socially, ecolo gic-
ally, or scien tiﬁ c ally’ (2008: 15). Con nections 
between species, as both Haraway and 
posthu man ecohor ror reveal, are not inher-
ently posit ive but may just as easily be 
harmful or danger ous. Th is is why, as Alaimo 
argues, ‘[t]rans- corpor eal ity is a site not for 
aﬃ  rm a tion, but rather for epistem o lo gical 
reﬂ ec tion and precau tion ary prin ciples’ 
(2010: 144). 
 Ecohorror reﬂ ects our fears about non- 
human nature in a variety of ways. Perhaps 
animals will attack us, perhaps we will lose 
our place at the top of the animacy hier-
archy, or perhaps we will have to acknow-
ledge our inter con nec ted ness with other 
beings. In doing so, ecohor ror risks rein for-
cing those fears and the categor ies they are 
built upon, but ecohor ror also asks us to 
recon sider some of those fears and to 
imagine what might happen if we were not 
to insist so vehe mently upon such divi sions. 
 See also Animacies; Animal; Anthropocene 
and 
Chthulucene; 
Trans- corpor eal ity; 
Posthuman Literature and Criticism. 
 Christy Tidwell 
 ECOLOGIES OF ARCHITECTURE  
 Reinventing archi tec ture can no longer 
signify the relaunch ing of a style, a school, 
a theory with a hege monic voca tion, but 
the recom pos i tion of  archi tec tural enun ci-
ation , and, in a sense, the trade of the 
archi tect, under today’s condi tions. 
 Once it is no longer the goal of the 
archi tect to be the artist of built forms but to 
oﬀ er his services in reveal ing the virtual 
desire of spaces, places, traject or ies and 
territ or ies, he will have to under take the 
analysis of the rela tions of indi vidual and 
collect ive corpor eal ity by constantly singu-
lar iz ing his approach. Moreover, he will 
have to become an inter cessor between 
these desires, brought to light, and the 
interests that they thwart. In other words, he 
will have to become an artist and an artisan 
of sens ible and rela tional lived exper i ence.  
 Guattari 2013: 232
 In a desper ate attempt to catch up with 
forms of contem por ary media culture, 
archi tects tend to perpetu ate earlier notions 
of culture as repres ent a tion rather than 
culture as forms of life ( Lash 2001 : 107). 
Architecture has yet to break with culture as 
reﬂ ec tion still ﬁ rmly embed ded in its
concepts of Utopia, Type, History, City, 
Geometry, Landscape and Ornament. To 
speak of the  ecolo gies of archi tec ture is 
to break with judge ment for exper i ence, to 
break with the propos i tional knowing- that 
for the impre dic at ive knowing- how ( Ryle 
2009 : 25–61). As the self- declared empir i-
cist (i.e. plur al ist) Gilles Deleuze put it in his 
book on Nietzsche, it is not about justi ﬁ c a-
tion, ‘but a diﬀ er ent way of feeling: another 
sens ib il ity’ ( Deleuze 1983 : 94). If to think 
diﬀ er ently we have to feel diﬀ er ently then 
the design of the built envir on ment has no 
other purpose but to trans form us ( Kwinter 
2014 : 313). While engin eer ing focuses 
on solu tions, archi tec ture dram at izes the 
problem so that we may stumble upon a 
new eman cip at ory poten tial ( Kipnis 2013 ). 
Aft er all, prob lems always have the solu tion 
that they deserve ( Smith 2012 : 307).  
 Pedagogy of the Senses 
 Posthuman archi tec ture ought to focus on 
the encounter between thought and that 
which forces it into action. While accept ing 
multiple nested scales of reality, the ecolo gies 
of archi tec ture chal lenge the alleged primacy 
of the ‘phys ical’ world. What we engage with 
is the world considered as an envir on ment 
and not an aggreg ate of objects. Th e emphasis 
is on the encounter, where exper i ence is seen 
as an emer gence which returns the body to a 
process ﬁ eld of exter i or ity ( Colebrook 2004 ). 
Sensibility intro duces an aleat ory moment 
into thought’s devel op ment, thus turning 
contin gency into the very condi tion for 
think ing. Not only does this upset logical 
iden tity and oppos i tion, it also places the 
limit of think ing beyond any dialect ical 
system. Th ought cannot activ ate itself by 
think ing but has to be provoked. It must 
suﬀ er viol ence. Art and archi tec ture may 
inﬂ ict such viol ence. Th ey harbour the 
poten tial for break ing up the faculties’ 
common func tion by placing them before 
their own limits: ‘thought before the unthink-
able, memory before the imme morial, sens-
ib il ity before the imper cept ible, etc.’ ( Deleuze 
1994 : 227). Th e eco- logical ‘perspect iv ist’ 
assault on the ego- logical repres ent a tional 
think ing inev it ably impinges upon the 
iden tity of the subject. Where Kant founded 
the repres ent a tional unity of space and 
time upon the formal unity of conscious ness, 
diﬀ er ence frac tures conscious ness into 
multiple states not predic able of a single 
subject. In other words, diﬀ er ence breaks 
with the diﬀ er en ti ation of an undiﬀ er en ti-
ated world in favour of the homo gen iz a tion 
of a milieu or  umwelt ( Deleuze and Guattari 
2004 : 62). To speak of Whiteheadian super- 
ject is to break with earlier notions of 
sub ject as a found a tion (Whitehead 1978: 
29). ‘Desiring- machines’ connect, discon nect 
and recon nect with one another without 
meaning or inten tion ( Deleuze and Guattari 
2008 : 288). Paradoxically, actions are primary 
in rela tion to the inten tions that animate 
them the same way that desir ing is primary 
to voli tion. Individuality is not char ac ter istic 
of a self or an ego, but a perpetu ally indi vidu-
al iz ing diﬀ er en tial. It is not the subject that 
has a point of view, rather it is the point of 
view that has its larval subject (Deleuze 
1980). Deleuze explains: ‘Each faculty, includ-
ing thought, has only invol un tary adven tures’ 
and ‘invol un tary oper a tion remains embed-
ded in the empir ical’ (Deleuze 1994: 145). 
Th is consti tutes his famous ‘pedagogy of the 
senses’.  
 Asignifying Semiotics 
 Th e ecolo gies of archi tec ture rely on 
carto graphy to over turn the theatre of 
repres ent a tion into the order of desir ing- 
produc tion ( Deleuze and Guattari 2004 : 
12). Th e ulti mate ambi tion is to debunk 
 hylo morph ism – where form is imposed
ECOLOGIES OF ARCHITECTURE 
the archi tect is seen as a god- given, inspired 
creator and genius – and to promote 
the altern at ive imman ent morpho gen etic 
approach that is at once more humble and 
ambi tious ( DeLanda 2002 : 28). Th ere lies a 
(r)evol u tion ary poten tial in creat ing the 
‘new’, deﬁ ned as the circu la tion of de- coded 
and de- territ ori al ized ﬂ ows that resist the 
facile co- option by re- coding or captur ing 
( Deleuze and Guattari 2008 : 379). To speak 
of univo city of expres sion is to break with 
equi vo c ity of the hege monic linguistic sign. 
Action and percep tion are insep ar able, as 
are forms of life and their envir on ments. If 
the objects of know ledge were separ ated 
from the objects of exist ence, we would end 
up with a duality of mental and phys ical 
objects – bifurc a tion of nature – that leads 
to an onto lo gic ally indir ect percep tion. By 
contrast, the premise of the ecolo gies of 
archi tec ture is that percep tual systems 
 reson ate to inform a tion, where inform a tion 
is deﬁ ned as a diﬀ er ence that makes a diﬀ er-
ence ( Gibson 1986 : 249;  Bateson 1972 ). Th is 
‘direct realism’ is groun ded on the premise 
that, from the outset, real exper i ence is a 
rela tion of poten tial struc ture rather than a 
form less chaotic swirl onto which struc ture 
must be imposed by cognit ive process 
(sapi ence). Th e world is seen as an ongoing 
open process of matter ing, where meaning 
and form are acquired in the actu al iz a tion 
of diﬀ er ent agen tial virtu al it ies ( Barad 
2007 ). Following Deleuze’s argu ment, it is 
possible to assert that the genetic prin ciples 
of sensa tion (sentience) are thus at the same 
time the prin ciples of compos i tion of 
art(efact) ( Deleuze 2003 ).  
 Niche Constructionism 
 Architecture ought to reclaim its vanguard 
posi tion within the Epigenetic Turn which 
embraces  tekhne as constitutive of posthu-
man ity, and not just the other way around 
( Stiegler 2008–11 : 12). Experience is not 
an event ‘in’ the mind. Rather, the mind 
emerges from inter ac tion with the envir on-
ment. Th e predom in ant homeo static notion 
of struc ture in archi tec tural think ing has to 
give way to the event- centred onto logy of 
rela tions. Th e meta sta bil ity of exist ence 
(formerly known as sustain ab il ity) is to be 
mapped in the very act of becom ing. Th e 
Aﬀ ective Turn in archi tec ture concen trates 
on percep tion which occurs not on the level 
at which actions are decided but on the 
level at which the very capa city for action 
forms, the virtual ( Massumi 2002 : 79). If rep -
 res ent a tion is a means to an end (to clas sify), 
schi zo ana lytic carto graphy is a means to 
a means (to inter vene) ( Guattari 2013 ). 
Teleology cannot be used as the sole design 
criterion because the freedom of action is 
never a de facto estab lished condi tion, it 
is always a virtu al ity ( Evans 1997 : 16–17). 
Th is proto- epistem o lo gical level of poten-
tial iz a tion (priming) is already onto lo gical 
( Massumi 2015a : 71). It concerns change 
in the degree to which a life- form is enabled 
vis-à- vis its (built) envir on ment. Th eir 
recip rocal determ in a tion commits contem-
por ary archi tec ture to ecology in general 
and ethico- aesthet ics in partic u lar ( Guattari 
1995 ). Th e psycho tropic cry that ‘we 
shape our cities; there aft er they shape us’ is 
to be taken liter ally. Only recently have 
biolo gists conceded the eﬀ ect that ‘niche 
construc tion’ has on the inher it ance system 
( Jablonka and Lamb 2005 ;  Odling-Smee, 
Laland and Feldman 2003 ). Th ey conﬁ rm 
that a life- form does not only  pass ively 
submit to the pres sures of a pre- exist ing 
envir on ment (evo), but also  actively 
constructs its exist en tial niche (devo), that 
being the city in the Anthropocene. Th e 
implic a tions for the discip line of archi tec-
ture, consid er ing its quasi- causal role in the 
neo-Lamarckian  Baldwian Evolution (evo- 
devo), remain signi ﬁ c ant and binding 
( Wexler 2010 : 143).
Th e New Materialisms in general, and the 
Aﬀ ective Turn in partic u lar, seem to be 
gaining momentum to such an extent that 
even some of the schol ars of this aﬃ  l i ation 
have been urging caution ( Colebrook 
2010 : 168–9). However, as far as the discip-
line of archi tec ture is concerned, this 
other wise healthy dose of scep ti cism is not 
only prema ture but also coun ter pro duct-
ive. In its history, archi tec ture has under-
gone a gradual disas so ci ation from the 
mater ial realm and become an ulti mate 
white- collar profes sion. Th e consequent 
with drawal 
from 
reality 
(thesis 
of 
autonomy) has been vari ously seen as 
‘bad’ escap ism or a ‘good’ strategy of resist-
ance ( Hays 1981 ). Th e urge to ward oﬀ  the 
givens and to continue to contem plate 
(possible) altern at ives is praise worthy. But 
ideal ist brack et ing and messi anic ambi tion 
come at a price. Architects might end up 
paint ing them selves into a corner of 
impot ence by depriving them selves of the 
(virtual) means to inter vene. Aft er all, 
inter ven tion has always been the main 
trait of (any) mater i al ism. Th e best strategy 
of resist ance seems to lie not in oppos i tion 
but in (stra tegic) aﬃ  rm a tion ( Braidotti 
2012 ). Th e recog ni tion of the present–
future rela tion provides a point of depar-
ture for an ecolo gical account of anti cip a-
tion and/or creation akin to Isabelle 
Stengers’ think ing  par le milieu ( Stengers 
2005 : 187). What deﬁ nes the concept of 
futur ity is the insepar ab il ity of the event 
and its envir on ment. Futurity is a condi-
tion of the present; it is the anti- utopi an ism 
of the ecolo gies of archi tec ture  par 
excel lence . 
 See also Aﬃ  rmation; Anthropocene; 
Ecosophy; Mattering; Metastability; Neo/
New Materialism; Posthumanism. 
 Andrej Radman 
 ECOMATERIALISM  
 A bird’s- eye view of contem por ary intel lec-
tual devel op ments reveals an increas ingly 
debated and widely exer cised mater ial turn 
unrav el ling trans vers ally across entwined 
research ﬁ elds. Ranging from science 
studies, ecophilo sopy, ecocriti cism and the 
envir on mental human it ies to femin ist 
philo sophy, gender and queer studies, 
anthro po logy, art theor ies and media 
studies, this new paradigm has assumed 
various cross- devel op ing forms and labels, 
such as new mater i al isms, neoma ter i al ism, 
mater ial ecocriti cism and ecoma ter i al ism. 
Th ey all contest the master narrat ives of 
liberal human ist culture, foster ing instead a 
revolu tion ary model of envir on ment al ity 
based on the idea of agentic mater i al ity for 
the appre hen sion of current and future 
ecolo gical complex it ies. 
 Of all the terms asso ci ated with the 
mater ial turn, however, ‘ecoma ter i al ism’ is 
the most under deﬁ ned, leaving us in doubt 
as to its being just another label that did not 
turn into a catch phrase like ‘new mater i al-
isms’ or ‘neoma ter i al ism’. ‘Ecomaterialism’ 
inev it ably leaves us guess ing whether it can 
or cannot be used as a mere synonym for 
either of these terms, as it not only inter sects 
and over laps with their discourse, but is also 
simil arly accom pan ied by a ﬂ our ish of 
redeﬁ ned concepts: matter, agency, nature, 
human, non- human, inhuman, posthu man, 
objects, things and rela tions. Despite this 
ambi val ence, ecoma ter i al ism is currently 
conceived as a project of theor iz ing the 
earth’s human and other- than-human 
dwell ers in terms of multiple becom ings 
with a detailed consid er a tion of what, in 
fact, is the major concern of this approach: 
the global dynamic of crisis ecolo gies as a 
result of human- driven alter a tions of the 
plan et ary ecosys tems, other wise known as 
the compuls ive powers of the Anthropocene. 
Even if all the envir on mental uncer tain ties,
ECOMATERIALISM 
epoch, an ecoma ter i al ist philo sophy of 
being and becom ing played out on these 
cross- scale inter ac tions is admit tedly a 
needful mode of thought. 
 In the face of intensi fy ing ecolo gical 
crises and mater ial intimacies, ecoma ter i al-
ism assists in imagin ing a world that is not 
relent lessly objec ti ﬁ ed, system at ic ally polar-
ized and innately gendered, but is profoundly 
earth- centred with ﬂ ex ible disan thro po-
centric models. Accordingly, ecoma ter i al-
ism is the epigen esis of the new mater i al ist 
theor ies, devel op ing in gradual diﬀ er en ti-
ation through their plat form and ampli fy ing 
their ecolo gical frame works, but not in 
the sense of restor ing a utopian ecolo gical 
harmony, or calling for an ideal istic bioso-
cial view of life. Instead, the under stand ing 
of ecology it supplies is an under stand ing of 
‘life in a vortex of shared precari ous ness and 
unchosen prox im it ies’ ( Cohen 2015a : 107). 
Ecomaterialism, in other words, compels us 
to reckon a living world with the protean 
condi tions of being mineral, vegetal, animal 
and human; a mater ial world in which 
earthly beings, things and forces are 
environed with the same ecolo gical, geolo-
gical and also biopol it ical plight. 
 In essence, then, ecoma ter i al ist thought 
is resol utely ecolo gical – and admit tedly in 
multi plex ways that acknow ledge the envir-
on mental vicis situdes result ing from the 
‘unmap pable land scapes of inter act ing 
biolo gical, climatic, economic, and polit ical 
forces’ ( Alaimo 2010 : 2). By analys ing how 
multiple becom ings within these land scapes 
entangle bodies, ecosys tems, geobi o chem-
ical forces, human narrat ives, discourses 
and actions, ecoma ter i al ism becomes an 
ecolo giz ing recourse to the mater ial- 
discurs ive prac tices explored in the new 
mater i al ist paradigm that oft en elicit unre-
solved conﬂ icts between human and 
nonhu man ‘forces, bonds, and inter ac tions’ 
as Michel Serres has put it in  Th e Natural 
Contract (2002: 39). Th e human inﬂ u ence 
on Earth inter fer ing with the evol u tion 
of the planet attests to these conﬂ ic tual 
human–non- human–envir on mental inter-
ac tions. But ecoma ter i al ism suggests that 
despite the anthro po genic signa tures in the 
geolo gical record and in global land scapes, 
water scapes and the climate, the human is 
the inter sti tial species of gener at ive ecolo-
gies and vital mater i al it ies. 
‘Ecomaterialism’ was ﬁ rst employed in 
this context by Jeﬀ rey J. Cohen and Lowell 
Duckert in their introduction, titled “Howl,” 
to the special issue of  postmedieval: a journal 
of medieval cultural studies . Cohen and 
Duckert argue that ecomaterialism ‘asks us 
to hear the howls of heterogeneous life 
forms – everywhere and from every thing,’ 
and that it “compels us to think of our own 
existence as interstitial beings” (2013:5). In 
her response essay ‘Th e Elements’ in the 
same issue, Jane Bennett describes the 
term ‘as an attempt to re-describe human 
experience so as to uncover more of the 
activity and power of a variety of nonhu-
man players amidst and within us’ 
(2013:109). In this sense, ‘ecomaterialism’ 
refers to the new ecologies of what 
Cohen and Duckert call ‘precarious bonds’ 
(2013: 4) and unpredictable partner -
ships between the human and the 
nonhuman agents in conceptually ﬂ uid 
and materially porous landscapes. Cohen 
and Duckert reinvigorate the term in 
their introduction to  Elemental Ecocriti -
cism , inviting ‘a deeper contemplation of 
ecomateriality’ (2015: 269) in terms of 
elemental relations. Ecomaterialism, they 
claim, ‘conjoins thinking the limits of 
the human with thinking elemental 
activity and environmental justice’ (2015b: 
5). In studying the collisions, frictions, 
conﬂ uences, and intimacies between the
ongoing co-emergences, ecomaterialism 
also enacts a concern, not only for the 
globetrotting 
crisis 
ecologies 
with 
detrimental corporeal eﬀ ects, but for the 
speciﬁ c pragmatics of the ethical, social, and 
political conditions of multiple becomings. 
Th e end results are the complicated 
phenomena of toxic landscapes, acidic 
oceans, dying species, viral microorganisms, 
and changing climate, indeﬁ nitely being 
reshaped by the intermixing geopolitical 
forces 
with 
intensifying 
catastrophic 
eﬀ ectivity that eventually triggers social 
unrest not containable in local geographies. 
Th is disenchanted material reality, as Karen 
Barad rightly points out, is undeniably 
‘sedimented out of particular practices that 
we have a role in shaping and through 
which we are shaped’ (2007: 390). When 
humans sediment with the world they 
shape, the problematizing conditions of 
their enactment become seamlessly bound 
together with the nonhuman to disclose 
what is not only susceptible of materially 
based ecological change, but also of 
social transformations that oft en manifest 
as regional chaos, social struggles, and 
disrupted sociopolitical structures. Th e 
impacts of climate change on agriculture 
and ecosystems illustrate well how the 
ecological becomes an extension of the 
social, oft en resulting in political and social 
strife and crisis.
 According to the World Bank report 
from November 2015, for example, ‘climate 
change could drive more than 100 million 
people into poverty by 2030 largely due to 
diﬃ   culties produ cing crops’ ( Worland 
2015 ). Climate change, the research ers 
claim, seri ously impacts food secur ity, land 
and water productiv ity, and live stock 
manage ment ( Hallegatte et  al. 2016 ). 
Th inking through such high uncer tain ties 
in symbolic and mater ial land scapes, 
ecoma ter i al ism navig ates a multi tude of 
shift  ing mean ings that are pivots of ideo lo-
gical, cultural and envir on mental conﬂ icts. 
Furthermore, analys ing the vital but also 
convo luted mater i al it ies in which the non- 
human is entangled along with the human, 
ecoma ter i al ism cata lyses a disan thro po-
centric ideo logy that demands not only 
sustain able ecolo gical policies but also a 
discurs ive change in cultural ethos. 
 Placing a concer ted emphasis on 
multiple modal it ies of becom ing that 
involve messy inter ac tions of human and 
non- human agen cies, ﬂ ows of elements 
and geobi o chem ical forces in the highly 
prob lem at ized zones of nature cul tures, 
ecoma ter i al ism also liber ates us from our 
spec u lat ive excep tion al ism. It invites a 
prac tice of think ing with what is around 
and inside us, before and aft er us, to 
extend the connect ive tissue of our rela-
tions, our mater i al ity and our creativ ity 
enmeshed in envir on mental complex it ies 
that unfold from the threshold of their 
ecolo gical, philo soph ical and liter ary 
labyrinths. Ecomaterialism, to put it bluntly, 
concep tu al izes the human subject as both 
mater i ally and cognit ively involved in 
these complex it ies and multiple becom-
ings. In this vision, the porous borders 
between human beings and more- than-
human envir on ments under score a sense 
of the seam less ness of the join between 
mater ial and social dynam ics, and conscript 
the criss- cross ing stories of human and 
non- human agen cies groun ded in an 
endlessly revis able narrat ive of life. 
 Although ecoma ter i al ism is not a self- 
authen tic at ing mode of thought, as it is not 
a static way of looking at the ecolo gical 
decline the world at large is facing, it may 
well be that the most diﬃ   cult task which the 
theor ists are called upon to perform today 
is to expose the histor ic ally and cultur ally 
condi tioned char ac ter of their discip lines, 
to preside over the dissol u tion of anthro po-
centric theor et ical know ledge. Oﬀ ering new
ECONTOLOGY 
posi tions to theor ize the current dispar ate, 
multi valent social and envir on mental 
phenom ena may be the ﬁ rst step in devel-
op ing ecolo gical ways of being. Th ese posi-
tions, however, must be able to produce 
work able solu tions in order to over ride the 
persist ing util it arian human ist prin ciples 
that are still oper at ive in world cultures. 
And whether ecoma ter i al ism opens this 
path as the next step is yet to be seen. 
 See also  Anthropocene; In/human; Non- 
human Agency; Neo/New Materialism; 
(Material) Ecocriticism; Naturecultures. 
 Serpil Oppermann 
 ECONTOLOGY  
 Econtology is a neolo gism we need in 
order to address philo soph ic ally the prob-
lem atic situ ation man has manoeuvred 
himself into in the twenty- ﬁ rst century. 
Modern categor ies, based on oppos i tional 
think ing, lack the clarity to analyse our 
current situ ation that has been labelled as 
the Anthropocene: the present geolo gical 
epoch that started in the Industrial 
Revolution, during which human ity has 
begun to have a signi ﬁ c ant impact on 
the envir on ment. Econtology combines 
ecology and onto logy. Ecology is the 
science that analyses inter ac tions between 
organ isms and their envir on ment. In this 
systemic approach feed back recurs iv ity is 
the crucial mech an ism that regu lates 
processes in which all species, all artic u la-
tions of being are involved. Th is insight 
inspired Gregory Bateson in  Steps to an 
Ecology of Mind (1972) to redeﬁ ne collect-
ive conscious ness of nature as ‘mind’. From 
a cyber netic perspect ive he mapped reality 
as a pattern of patterns. By then Félix 
Guattari in cooper a tion with Gilles Deleuze 
had reworked Bateson’s notions of ‘schizo-
phrenia’ and ‘plateau’ in  Anti-Oedipus 
(1972) and  A Th ousand Plateaus (1980), 
the two volumes of  Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia . Patterns are the eco- social 
substance of a mental ecology. In  Th e 
Th ree Ecologies (1989) Guattari forged an 
envir on mental, a social and a mental 
ecology together. In this way nature, socio- 
cultural rela tions and indi vidual subjectiv-
ity were inter woven into an ecolo gical 
texture. I have labelled this threefold 
ecology as  ECO 3: phys ical, social and 
mental ( Oosterling 2015 ). 
 Ontology is the philo soph ical study of 
the nature of being and becom ing. What are 
the 
basic 
categor ies 
of 
being 
and 
how do beings relate? Aft er the critique and 
decon struc tion of meta phys ics by Friedrich 
Nietzsche, thinkers inspired by his writ ings 
like Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, 
Deleuze and Guattari focused in their 
‘reality check’ on forces instead of entit ies. 
Th e latter are second ary phenom ena: ever- 
provi sional results of the clash of forces that 
strive to incor por ate or anni hil ate each 
other. Yet these forces in them selves are 
non- signi ﬁ c ant vectors. In order to under-
stand their eﬃ  c acy and compre hend their 
coher ency – by asking not ‘what are they?’ 
but ‘how do they work?’ – their speciﬁ c 
artic u la tion as power rela tions need to be 
invest ig ated. Forces are always already 
inscribed into patterns of being as power 
rela tions. Th is shift  from force ( puis sance ) to 
power ( pouvoir ) led thinkers of diﬀ er ence to 
the conclu sion that onto logy and polit ics – 
the exclus ive domain where power rela tions 
are addressed – are no longer separ ate 
domains. Ontology is polit ical by deﬁ n i tion. 
Politics imme di ately deﬁ nes being. 
 Th is asks for a more artic u lated deﬁ n i-
tion of power. Aft er Claude Lefort’s distinc-
tion between Politics and the Political and 
Foucault’s focus on a micro phys ics versus 
macro phys ics of power, the inter ac tion of 
forces can be analysed on diﬀ er ent plat eaus
or planes: macro pol it ic ally on an insti tu-
tional and corpor at ive plane whereupon 
polit ics and corpor a tions as global players 
operate, meso pol it ic ally on the plane of 
grass- root resist ance where discip lined 
normal ity is contested, and micro pol it ic-
ally on the sub- indi vidual plane of aﬀ ects 
where people primar ily connect and on 
which market strategies and brand ing 
control collect ive and indi vidual desire. 
Th ese levels can only be distin guished 
system at ic ally and cannot be separ ately 
manip u lated. Th ey are inter de pend ent, 
inter twined in networks, encom passing all 
life forces on earth. 
 Given these insights, ecolo gical issues 
can be redeﬁ ned from a network theor et-
ical point of view as has been done by 
Bruno Latour in his Actor-Network-
Th eory ( ANT ). In our glob al ized, digit al-
ized, tech no lo gic ally highly advanced 
network society, as analysed by soci olo gist 
Manuel Castells in the 1990s, everything 
is connec ted to everything and as such is 
inﬂ u enced by and inﬂ u en cing every other 
thing. Th e onto lo gical emphasis there fore 
is on rela tions, not on (id)entit ies. In our 
present state of hyper g lob al iz a tion the 
complex ity of inter con nec ted processes 
has reached crit ical limits in which human 
inde cis ive ness can no longer be checked 
by human action. In the present Anthropo-
 cene, human action imme di ately and non- 
inten tion ally determ ines reality in its 
essen tial connectiv ity. Th is asks for a more 
precise notion of onto logy. 
 According to Peter Sloterdijk, man’s 
contem por ary predic a ment is techno- 
rela tional.  Dasein  is design ( Oosterling 
2010 ). Th eory is a prac tice. Although onto-
logy as a philo soph ical enter prise is highly 
theor et ical, it has prac tical applic a tion in 
inform a tion science and tech no logy. Th eo-
retical physics deals with the imman ent 
struc ture of reality. Yet, this cutting- edge 
research does not describe an object ive 
given. On a perform at ive and prac tical 
plane the exper i ment a tion of theor et ical 
phys i cists in their labor at or ies – scientiﬁ c 
prac tices where reality is checked ‘theor et-
ic ally’ – is already biased by the hand ling 
of tools and by the progress ive trans la tion 
of the results to a higher theor et ical level, 
upgrad ing the ﬁ nd ings of a partic u lar case 
to a univer sal law. 
 Latour and Isabelle Stengers have 
analysed this scientiﬁ c prac tice crit ic ally. 
Th e latter’s co- research with Ilya Prigogine 
on what really takes place – meth od o lo gic-
ally and epistem o lo gic ally – in labor at ory 
prac tices of phys i cists led her to develop 
the notion of an ecology of prac tice: 
  An ecology of prac tices does not have any 
ambi tion to describe prac tices ‘as they 
are’; it resists the master word of a 
progress that would justify their destruc-
tion. It aims at the construc tion of new 
‘prac tical iden tit ies’ for prac tices, that is, 
new possib il it ies for them to be present, 
or in other words to connect. It thus does 
not approach prac tices as they are – 
physics as we know it, for instance – but 
as they may become. 
 Stengers 2005 : 186 
 Within this (per)form at ive context the 
notion of polit ical ecology is used. Political 
ecology is the study of the rela tion ships 
between polit ical, economic and social 
factors with envir on mental issues and 
processes. On a macro pol it ical plane envir-
on mental issues are politi cized. Th is one- 
dimen sional notion of polit ical ecology, 
address ing power only on a macro pol it ical 
level, was intro duced by Frank Th one in 
Enzensberger in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Inserted in the Anthropocene perspect ive 
it needs multipolit ical (Deleuze/Guattari/
Foucault) 
and 
intras cientiﬁ c 
(Latour/
Stengers) ex plan ation. Mesopolitically it 
them at izes power rela tions within an ecology
ECOPATHY 
of prac tices. Micropolitically it decon structs 
modern desire that is inscribed into the body 
in order to produce a discip lined subjectiv ity 
(Foucault) that is over de termined by a 
discourse that opposes nature to culture 
(Latour). Th is multi- layered exten sion of 
polit ical ecology politi cizes onto logy in a 
triple sense (Guattari). Latour prob lem at ized 
the simple notion of polit ical ecology by 
asking whether the discourse of modern ity 
allows the Anthropocenic combin a tion of 
polit ics and ecology: ‘To modern ize or to 
ecolo gize? Th at’s the ques tion’ ( Latour 1998 ). 
In the ﬁ nal instance the modern oppos i tion 
between culture and nature does not allow a 
crit ical estim a tion of the role of all parti-
cipants – human and non- human, from 
miner als to tech no lo gical media – in the 
immense trans form a tion that the Earth is 
currently going through. Political implies an 
equal ity of all beings, not as actors with 
subjectiv ity, but as ‘actants’ with agency. In 
order to estab lish a multipolit ical and intras-
cientiﬁ c ex planation  of how reality works, 
the philo soph ical discourse on ecology 
needs an exten ded notion of onto logy: eco- 
onto logy or econ to logy. 
 See also Ecopathy; Epigenetic Landscape; 
Ontological Turn; Neo/New Materialism. 
 Henk Oosterling 
 ECOPATHY  
 A Trip to the Beach 
 In his superb study  Anthropocene Fictions 
liter ary theor ist Adam Trexler ( 2015 ) has 
argued that the Anthropocene is as much 
an envir on mental devel op ment as it is ‘a 
cultural trans form a tion’. Extending Trexler’s 
argu ment, my thesis here is that the 
Anthropocene is also  paral lel to , though not 
neces sar ily a  consequence of , ecolo gical 
devel op ments, what Fredric Jameson ( 1991 ) 
might have called a cultural domin ant: a 
preval ent struc ture of feeling, a senti ment, 
or rather still,  mood , shared so widely as to 
suggest it is one of the key char ac ter ist ics of 
contem por ary culture. Th e point here is not 
simply that the Anthropocene is on our 
minds, but rather that our bodies are on the 
Anthropocene, in the sense that one is not 
think ing about speed but is on speed – or 
 LSD , or crystal meth, or rather still, asbes-
tos: thoughts spin ning, muscles tensed up, 
blood pumping, heart racing, increas ingly 
out of control.  Ecopathy is the cultural con-
di tion of being on climate change- speed, 
invol un tar ily dancing on a Th ai beach long 
aft er the full moon has been obscured by 
the sun, joylessly bopping in the sunset as 
the rising tides wash away the sand at our 
feet, twerking beyond exhaus tion, trip ping 
over our own feet in agon iz ing pain. What 
follows below is an anec dotal account, I 
guess you could call it, of walking on these 
post- apoca lyptic 
shores, 
avoid ing 
the 
wasted bodies only to tread on the refuse of 
pins and needles every other step. One step, 
‘hey, climate change’; the next, ‘oh, the last 
panda’, ‘drought’, ‘tsuna mis’, ‘posthu man ism’, 
and so forth, to the point that a walk on the 
beach resembles the exper i ence of a walk 
on a garbage belt. Th e beach, or the ﬁ eld, 
that I most oft en stroll on is that of art, 
and culture more broadly. What I want to 
discuss here are some of the things I couldn’t 
help – because they were so ubiquit ous, so 
embar rass ingly omni present – but step on 
the past years. What I present you with, if 
you will, is a socio- cultural history of the 
sore soles of my feet aft er a stroll on the 
shores. 
 One of my earli est memor ies walking 
on the beach is a  Seinfeld episode I came 
across which is set on the New York shores. 
Th e episode – ‘Th e Marine Biologist’, from 
the ﬁ ft h season – weaves together a number 
of stories, two of which are of interest here.
In the ﬁ rst of these stories, Jerry Seinfeld’s 
best friend George Costanza, who is, at this 
point, miser ably unem ployed, pretends he 
is a marine biolo gist so as to attract a 
nature- loving woman. Th e second story 
pertains to Jerry’s idio syn cratic neigh bour, 
Cosmo Kramer, who has been prac tising 
his golf swing oﬀ  the New York coast, 
hitting balls into the ocean. In the ﬁ nal 
scene, 1 in which the stories are tied in to 
one another, George and his girl friend are 
walking on the beach only to ﬁ nd a 
distressed whale stran ded on the shore. 
Trapped in his lie, in which he is a scholar 
of ocean ecology, George feels forced to 
approach the whale to see what is wrong. 
As he comes close – quite surpris ingly, 
given that he is not actu ally a marine biolo-
gist; indeed he doesn’t even know that a 
whale is a mammal rather than a ﬁ sh – he 
ﬁ nds out what the problem is: a golf ball 
obstructs the whale’s blowhole. 
 Seinfeld 
here 
addresses 
the 
Anthropocene, human ity’s impact on the 
world around it – below, above, between, 
through, within – that is to say, quite liter-
ally, its imprint on the Earth’s geology, 
through at least three distinct tropes.  First , 
the Anthropocene is presen ted as a joke, as 
a pun. It is less a tragic reality – for we do 
not actu ally see Kramer’s golf ball strike 
the whale, nor do we witness George’s 
rescue – than a story told for laughs. 
 Second , the Anthropocene is an acci dent, a 
coin cid ental eﬀ ect of a care less but by no 
means malig nant atti tude towards nature. 
It is obvious that Kramer had no inten tion 
of hitting a whale. His so- called ‘hole in 
one’ was as unfor tu nate as it was unfore-
seen. At the same time, he wouldn’t have 
struck the whale had he not mind lessly 
clubbed golf balls into the sea . . .  Th ird , the 
Anthropocene is easily resolved. Even 
George, an idiot if there ever was one, an 
unpar alleled narciss ist, is able to save the 
whale. Finally, it might be noted that 
 Seinfeld ’s Anthropocene is exclus ively 
white, western and male. In short,  Seinfeld 
presents the Anthropocene as a funny 
mishap which can be straightened out by 
middle- aged white guys. 
 I take  Seinfeld ’s approach to the 
Anthropocene, which is as hilari ous as it is 
disturb ing, to be char ac ter istic of the atti-
tude towards envir on mental prob lems in 
the 1980s and 1990s – or, for that matter, 
economic, polit ical or moral issues. Th at is 
not to say that it was the only approach, 
that there weren’t any NGOs and indi vidu-
als ringing alarm bells, that Greenpeace 
activ ists weren’t roaming the shores on the 
lookout for whale or seal hunters, or that 
there weren’t any artists and writers 
worried about climate change and rising 
sea levels, about tsuna mis and extinct 
animals. Indeed, when I posited this ques-
tion to friends and colleagues, they pointed 
out numer ous examples of texts that did 
just that. Th e art critic Tom Morton 
proposed Alan Moore’s graphic short story 
‘Sunburn’ (1970), which imagines a beach 
resort on the sun, while philo sopher Nina 
Power reminded me of more or less the 
whole of Ballard’s oeuvre. 2 Someone like 
Ursula K. Le Guin also comes to mind, as 
do Frank Herbert and of course Philip K. 
Dick. However, I would argue that in the 
eighties and nineties,  Seinfeld ’s moral 
disin terest was the most common atti tude 
towards the Anthropocene – the others, at 
the time, were what Raymond Williams 
(1977) might have called ‘emer gent’, 
peri pheral struc tures of feeling yet to 
take centre stage. Indeed, the very wording 
of the prob lems, the label of the 
Anthropocene, had by this time not yet 
been formu lated. 
 Returning to the beach twenty- ﬁ ve years 
on, one ﬁ nds its culture has changed beyond 
compare. George and Kramer have nearly 
been pushed out of the picture, crowded out 
by a more envir on ment ally conscious
ECOPATHY 
bunch – to be sure, not neces sar ily better 
or worse people, just people with other 
prior it ies. I am refer ring here above all to 
the popular iz a tion of post- apoca lyptic eco- 
novels and ﬁ lms – ranging from, most 
recently, Kim Stanley Robinson’s canon and 
Paolo Bacigalupi’s  Ship Breaker to Michel 
Houellebecq’s  Th e Possibility of an Island 
and (the ﬁ lmic adapt a tion of) Cormac 
McCarthy’s  Th e Road  – in which the chro-
no tope of the beach signi ﬁ es the border 
between land and water as well as between 
past and future, ruins and air castles, desol-
a tion and despair. If  Seinfeld ’s trip to the 
beach was light- hearted and epis odic, 
contem por ary liter at ure more oft en than 
not arrives there in a grave mood, as its 
ﬁ nal, desti tute destin a tion: it’s here, or 
nowhere – and if it is here, I suppose, it is 
only brieﬂ y, echoing Foucault’s ﬁ nal lines in 
 Th e Order of Th ings : ‘Man would be erased, 
like a face drawn at the edge of the sea’ 
(2005: 422). But I am also think ing of an art 
project like Captain Boomer’s 2008 install a-
tion  Beached Whale . Th e Belgian collect ive 
created a real istic seven teen- metre-long 
carcass of a sperm whale, covered in blood, 
smelling of rot, which they installed on 
Scheveningen beach – and in later years 
other beaches all over the world. A team of 
actors was hired to play the roles of scient-
ists, examin ing the mammal’s cadaver. 
 Seinfeld ’s white men were still in time to 
save the whale, but by the time Captain 
Boomer’s men and women in white coats 
arrived they could do little more than grieve 
over it. Th eir sole func tion was docu ment a-
tion, the produc tion and distri bu tion of 
inform a tion, aft er the fact. 
 My argu ment here is twofold. First, I 
argue, like many others, that in the past 
decades, our rela tion ship to the envir on-
ment, beach, whale or else where has 
gradu ally come to occupy the centre stage 
of our imagin a tion. To put it in Williams’s 
terms: it has intens i ﬁ ed from an emer gent 
struc ture of feeling to a domin ant one. I 
guess this much is obvious. More import-
antly, however, I want to argue that the 
nature of our engage ment with the envir-
on ment has changed. Of course, we’ve 
become more serious, but that’s not what I 
mean.  Seinfeld ’s inter ac tion with the 
beach’s ecosys tem was not just humor istic; 
it’s comedy was of a partic u lar register: 
distinctly object- speciﬁ c, local and short- 
lived. It begins and ends with the stran ded 
whale. Th e senti ment in a post- apoca lyptic 
ﬁ lm like  Th e Road  or the install a tion 
 Beached Whale , in contrast, is object less, 
global and protrac ted. In  Th e Road , 
envir on ment al ism is less a response to a 
partic u lar problem than, if you allow me 
to stretch the term, an exper i en tial  a 
priori that informs every possible problem. 
Even the point of  Beached Whale is less 
the image of a dead whale, than it is the 
sense of ﬁ nal ity it implies. Th e plump ness, 
the solem nity, the blood, the rot, the smell, 
the scient ists docu ment ing aft er the fact: 
we’re always already too late. 
 It would be a mistake to say that culture 
has relo cated to the beach. Rather, it’s the 
other way around: the beach, as chro no tope, 
has moved into culture – a sort of chro-
nomove, a chro nomot ive (I wish I had 
inven ted this term, but a quick inter net 
browse suggests it already exists, and even 
appears to be trade marked). Th e number of 
novels in which rising sea levels and super 
storms have pushed the beach into or 
beyond cities like London and New York 
has increased expo nen tially over the past 
decades – I am think ing here again, of the 
likes 
of 
Robinson, 
Bacigalupi 
and 
Houellebecq, but also of the last chapters of 
less obvious choices like T. C. Boyle’s  A 
Friend of the Earth , Margaret Atwood’s  Th e 
Year of the Flood , Jennifer Egan’s novel  A 
Visit from the Goon Squad or David 
Mitchell’s  Th e Bone Clocks . In ﬁ lm, the trope 
of the retreat ing coastal line features in
anything from the block buster disaster ﬂ ick 
 Th e Day Aft er Tomorrow to the inde pend-
ent eco- community feature  Beasts from the 
Southern Wild . An inter est ing example in 
contem por ary art is Olafur Eliasson’s 2010 
install a tion series  Drift wood . In this project, 
the artist distrib utes drift  wood he collec ted 
at the Iceland coast across Berlin. Placing 
the weathered wood at pave ments, round-
abouts, parking areas and alleys in the city, 
he both extends and reverses western 
culture’s Romantic rela tion ship to nature. 
On the one hand, the pieces of drift  wood 
invoke mystery – of origin, of journey, of 
placing. It poses ques tions like: ‘Where are 
these pieces of wood from?’ and ‘How did 
these pieces get here?’ Or, simply: ‘What do 
they mean?’ and ‘What do they invoke?’ On 
the other hand, however, the weathered logs 
also suggest an altern ate hier archy between 
culture and nature, one where Kramer is no 
longer hitting golf balls into the ocean, but 
where the sea is pitch ing them back at us. 
What Eliasson’s install a tions imply here is a 
diﬀ er ent rela tion ship between culture and 
nature, one in which the latter is not an 
external obstacle, or an incor por ated means 
to an end, but always already an integ ral 
part. As Timothy Morton explains so evoc-
at ively in  Th e Ecological Th ought (2010): we 
coexist. It just that we’ve only now real ized 
as much. 
 In his bril liant essay ‘Art and Mood’, 
philo sopher Noel Carroll distin guishes 
between an emotion and a mood. An 
emotion, he writes, is a response to a state 
of aﬀ airs in the world. It is ‘direc ted’ 
towards a partic u lar object, and is short- 
lived. If I am angry, aft er all, the anger is 
related to someone or some thing who has 
angered me. I might well depart with my 
anger if that person apolo gizes. For 
example: I am angry because my partner 
has put the organic waste in the regular bin 
instead of the recyc ling bin. ‘You’, I shout, 
or whisper, or think, depend ing on the 
aﬀ ect ive register of the rela tion ship (maybe 
it’s very repress ive), ‘are killing the planet!’ 
If in response my partner apolo gizes, says, 
‘Oh, sorry, I wasn’t think ing clearly for a 
second there’ (imagine a conver sa tion 
would ever run like that!), chances are I 
forgive that person instantly. An emotion 
is related to an extern al ity that trans gresses 
your aﬀ ect ive bound ar ies, as it were. If it 
retreats, your harmony is restored. 
 A mood, by contrast, Carroll
ECOSOPHY 
 Th e diﬀ er ence between  Seinfeld and 
Captain Boomer, between Kramer’s golf 
balls and the drift  wood, is not only quant-
it at ive, but also qual it at ive.  Seinfeld 
presents the Anthropocene, or whatever it 
was called at that time, as an emotion, 
oriented, local and short- lived, informed 
by a distinct event, a distinct trans gres sion 
of our aﬀ ect ive bound ar ies. Captain 
Boomer and Eliasson, in contrast, intro-
duce it as a mood, an object less, or ‘object-
less able’, global, protrac ted senti ment that 
informs, that cannot but inform, all other 
inter ac tions. We no longer need to head 
out to the beach to exper i ence how we’ve 
aﬀ ected the envir on ment; the beach is 
always already with us; the golf balls, the 
whale, the drift  wood, invari ably on our 
minds. As Naomi Klein writes in  Th is 
Changes Everything , it’s nothing less than 
an ‘exist en tial crisis’ (2014: 15): a ‘fear that 
comes from living on a planet that is dying, 
made less alive every day’. It’s a fear that 
‘won’t go away . . . is a fully rational 
response to the unbear able reality that we 
are living in a dying world, a world that a 
great many of us are helping to kill’ (28). 3 It 
is, indeed, a condi tion, one that we were, 
and will be born with, for as long as, well, I 
guess, there still is a Mother Earth to give 
birth to us. 
 See also Ecosophy; Animism (Limulus); 
Metamodernism.
through in our times, human domin ance (or 
to be more precise, the domin ance of 
‘modern man’) reveals itself geolo gic ally ‘on 
a scale compar able with some of the major 
events of the ancient past. Some of these 
changes are now seen as perman ent, even on 
a geolo gical time- scale’ ( Zalasiewicz et  al. 
2010 : 2228). In a follow- up article, the 
authors went even further, claim ing that 
‘Th e Anthropocene is here treated as a 
geolo gical phenomenon, compar able to 
some of the great events of the Earth’s deep 
past. But, the driving force for the compon-
ent global changes is ﬁ rmly centered in 
human beha vior, partic u larly in social, polit-
ical and economic spheres’ ( Zalasiewicz 
et  al. 2011 : 838). By stress ing the various 
‘spheres’ in which we live, Zalasiewicz et al. 
emphas ize that the idea that human activ ity 
domin ates the planet does not mean that 
human ity is somehow ‘in control’ of our age. 
On the contrary, our Brave New World real-
izes itself in many ways that were unfore-
seen; as consequences of long- gone activ ity, 
marginal acci dents and a series of other 
‘swerves’ that have begun to live lives of their 
own, folding them selves deeply in the 
surface of the Earth and the atmo spheres 
embra cing it, far beyond the reach of 
human ity. Th e new reality it produces, and is 
about to produce, is thus accom pan ied with 
new types of unrest (new types of weaponry 
even), in many ways unknown to us. 
 Crutzen and others state that the 
Antropocene started over 200 years ago, or 
to be more precise with the improve ments 
made to the steam engine by James Watt, and 
the new concept of tech no logy this launched. 
Contrary to those mech an ized processes 
that, quite randomly, helped us in our every-
day activ it ies in the pre- modern world, 
modern tech no logy, it is claimed, was a 
 program in that it intro duced us to a new 
gener a tion of machines that was all about 
optim iz ing 
our 
every day 
proced ures 
econom ic ally (the  increase  of proﬁ t is what 
counts) and, because it came with a non- 
local source of energy (coal, oil, elec tri city), 
was largely indiﬀ er ent to the envir on ments 
surround ing these proced ures (and thus in a 
way  neces sar ily pollut ing them). Modern 
tech no logy’s uneas i ness with its surround-
ings, informed ecocriti cism and with that the 
ﬁ rst strand of ecosophy in the 1970s, with its 
most prom in ent author Arne Naess and his 
Deep Ecology Movement (also known as 
Ecosophy T). Th e Deep Ecology Movement, 
celeb rat ing life from a deeply human ist 
perspect ive, had quite an impact, includ ing 
polit ic ally, with various Green parties that 
have been fairly success ful espe cially in post- 
war Europe, and that play a prom in ent role 
in the ecolo gical debate to the present day. 
Continuing Naess’s idea of ‘self- real iz a tion’ 
(see for instance  Naess 1993 ), which was all 
about humans real iz ing them selves anew in 
rela tion to at least parts of nature (thus 
promot ing a full scale ‘human iz a tion of the 
envir on ment’, as Braidotti put it (2006a: 
116)), this ‘Green Movement’, though all 
too oft en found to the left  of the polit ical 
spec trum, holds a quite conser vat ive if not 
reac tion ary agenda most of the time. Th e 
narrat ive of Naess ﬁ ts Crutzen’s threat en ing 
futures and those of other concerned scien -
t ists today: together with modern tech no-
logy, modern human ity has removed itself 
from nature, and the revolu tion to take place 
is, very clas sical, a return to a State of Nature 
that has been left  behind. 
 An altern at ive, much more posthu man 
ecosophy has been developed since the 
1970s by schol ars like Gregory Bateson. In 
his 1972 book  Steps to an Ecology of Mind , 
Bateson intro duces us to an ecology that 
was not so much aimed at ‘protect ing’ 
nature and distrust ing tech no logy (and 
culture, and human ity at large). Echoing 
the way in which Alfred North Whitehead 
had already noted that all tech no logy is 
neces sar ily an abstrac tion from nature, 
Bateson oﬀ ered us an ecosophy that starts
ECOSOPHY 
make up everday life, produ cing the series 
of assemblages in and through which we 
act. (In that sense there is no intrinsic 
diﬀ er ence between modern tech no logy 
and the wheel.) Conceptualizing the mind, 
Bateson thus shows how think ing is neces-
sar ily a rela tional power, a consequence of 
the mater ial assemblage. 
 What thinks and engages in trial and 
error is the man plus the computer plus 
the envir on ment. And the lines between 
man, computer and envir on ment are 
purely arti ﬁ  cial, ﬁ cti tious lines. Th ey are 
lines across the path ways along which 
inform a tion or diﬀ er ence is trans mit ted. 
Th ey are not bound ar ies of the think ing 
system. What thinks is the total system 
which engages in trial and error, which is 
man plus envir on ment. 
 Bateson 1972 : 491 
 Th is wholly other form of ecosophy, in 
which one does not start from  oppos i tions 
between mind and body, man and animal, 
man and nature, nature and culture, tech-
no logy and earth (to name just a few of the 
oppos i tions (impli citly) at work in Crutzen 
and Naess), but instead from  rela tions , 
allows us to analyse the crises of today in a 
completely diﬀ er ent way, if only because 
the role of ecolo gical think ing as such now 
changes from crit ical (oppos i tional) to 
aﬃ  rm at ive (mutual coex istens ive): it is not 
so much in search of answers to prob lems 
posed by our era, but rather searches for 
ways to be inter woven with the move-
ments and the swerves of today. Or better: 
this second form of ecosophy is not so 
much think ing  about ecology but  does 
ecolo gical think ing. Being unlim ited it 
rethinks our era  as a whole , oﬀ er ing us a 
(possibly)  complete philo sophy  and a 
(possibly)  complete idea of what threatens 
peace ful coex ist ence not only between 
people and between states, but between 
everything that matters. Th e analysis by 
Bateson in the early 1970s then oﬀ ers us a 
very diﬀ er ent analysis of envir on mental 
issues or ecolo gical disasters as they are 
called. Bateson explains: 
 Let us now consider what happens when 
you make the epistem o lo gical error of 
choos ing the wrong unit: you end up with 
the species versus the other species 
around it or versus the envir on ment in 
which it oper ates. Man against nature. You 
end up, in fact, with Kaneohe Bay polluted, 
Lake Erie a slimy green mess, and ‘Let’s 
build bigger atom bombs to kill oﬀ  the 
next- door neigh bors.’ Th ere is an ecology 
of bad ideas, just as there is an ecology of 
weeds, and it is char ac ter istic of the 
system that basic error propag ates itself. It 
branches out like a rooted para site 
through the tissues of life, and everything 
get into a rather pecu liar mess. When you 
narrow down your epistem o logy and act 
on the premise ‘What interests me is me, 
or my organ iz a tion, or my species,’ you 
chop oﬀ  consid er a tion of other loops of 
the loop struc ture. You decide that you 
want to get rid of the by- products of 
human life and that Lake Erie will be a 
good place to put them. You forget that 
the eco- mental system called Lake Erie is 
part of your wider eco- mental system – 
and that if Lake Erie is driven insane, its 
insan ity is incor por ated in the larger 
system of your thought and exper i ence. 
 Bateson 1972 : 491–2 
 In the late 1980s, Félix Guattari rewrote 
Bateson’s ecology of mind in his famous 
essay  Th e Th ree Ecologies (1989) expand ing 
on this idea that the three ecolo gical 
registers 
(envir on mental, 
social 
and 
mental ecolo gies) are neces sar ily entwined 
and can only be studied in their entwin-
ings (rela tions). Th e kind of ‘insan ity’ that 
Guattari analyses (‘insan ity’ being a refer-
ence to the excerpt from Bateson above) 
always concerns all these three registers in
their inter con nec ted ness, which means 
that to worry about Lake Erie is also to 
worry about the insan ity that has over-
taken kinship networks, domestic life and 
neigh bour hood rela tions. Or to trans late 
this to our age, the denuded dry land scape 
in inner Syria, and the major urban iz a tion 
that followed cannot be seen as separ ate 
from the current civil war. 
 Especially in the post–2008 land scape, 
where a series of crises have surfaced and 
seem to hold the world in a tight grip 
(ecolo gical, econom ical and geopol it ical) a 
Batesoninan/Guattarian analysis of the 
ecolo gical and posthu man mind seems to 
be more needed than ever. Yet even in the 
late 1980s and the early 1990s Guattari 
himself noticed that we are running out of 
time: ‘Now more than ever, nature cannot 
be separ ated from culture; in order to 
compre hend the inter ac tions between 
ecosys tems, the mechano sphere and the 
social and indi vidual Universes of refer-
ence, we must learn to think “trans vers-
ally” ’ (2000: 29). 
 It is depress ing to conclude that these 
altern at ive ways of think ing ecology, as 
they have been developed by great minds 
like Bateson and Guattari, are only now, 
decades aft er their writ ings, being heard in 
a series of schol arly move ments that are 
increas ingly worried about the ongoing 
reign of the human ism. Th irty- ﬁ ve years 
aft er Bateson, twenty- ﬁ ve years aft er 
Guattari, think ing trans vers ally, think ing 
the social, the mental  and the envir on-
mental as ‘one’, has only just begun. Th e 
conclu sion can only be bitter, as Michel 
Serres tells us: ‘We will pay for this blind-
ness’ (2009/2014: 19). 
 See also Animism (Limulus); Ecopathy; 
Ecologies of Architecture; General Ecology; 
Planetary; Urbanibalism. 
 Rick Dolphijn 
 EPIGENETIC LANDSCAPE  
 Th e epigen etic land scape origin ated as a 
char coal drawing by the British land scape 
artist John Piper, commis sioned in 1940 by 
British embry olo gist- genet i cist Conrad Hall 
Waddington to be used as the frontis piece 
to his volume  Organisers and Genes . Th is 
precursor work in the ﬁ eld of epigen et ics 
examined the processes govern ing embry-
olo gical diﬀ er en ti ation and the role of genes 
in guiding devel op ment. Waddington inten-
ded the image of the epigen etic land scape 
to repres ent the devel op mental process 
(common to all euka ryotic species, that is 
species with cells and cell nuclei) through 
which a pluri po tent cell devel ops, over the 
course of inter ac tions with its envir on ment, 
to its speciﬁ c, diﬀ er en ti ated cell fate. 
 Pause for a moment to assim il ate this 
inform a tion: this scientiﬁ c model of devel-
op mental processes was origin ally a work 
of art. C. H. Waddington selec ted it – 
rather than a forking path, train diagram, 
tree diagram or any of the other possible 
scientiﬁ c repres ent a tions of devel op ment – 
to capture an essen tial aspect of animal life: 
how devel op ment progresses from geno type 
to phen o type, or from the hered it ary genetic 
make- up to one speciﬁ c morpho logy. Aft er 
this initial image, which he commis sioned 
during the London Blitz (and there is a story 
there, still to be told), Waddington moved 
away from artistic repres ent a tions, though he 
also considered and discarded other visual 
models for devel op ment. Instead, by 1957 he 
had settled on the schem atic repres ent a tion 
of the epigen etic land scape with which we 
are most famil iar today, an engrav ing- like 
image pictur ing a ball near the top of a hill 
ﬁ ssured with chan nels that extend from 
the top to the bottom. In Waddington’s 
schema, the ball is a fertil ized egg cell, and 
the hills and valleys indic ate not only the 
diﬀ er ent direc tions the devel op ing cell 
might take as it diﬀ er en ti ates, but also the
EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL THINKING) 
to that ulti mate cell fate. 
 Th e ﬁ eld Waddington founded, epigen et-
ics, drew together the insights of embry-
ology, the emer ging ﬁ eld of genet ics and 
evol u tion ary theory to explore morpho gen-
esis: how it was that an indi vidual organ ism 
developed from the hered it ary genome. 
Although research ers now examine the 
inter ac tion between the indi vidual and the 
envir on ment in ﬁ elds as wide spread as envir-
on mental toxic o logy, pren atal medi cine, 
nutri tion, psychi atry and cancer biology, the 
applic a tion of epigen et ics in these ﬁ elds 
reveals an epistem o lo gical narrow ing of the 
concept to a focus on gene activ a tion. Yet 
when naming this new ﬁ eld, Waddington 
borrowed the ‘epi-’ from the old term ‘epigen-
esis’, to emphas ize that the ﬁ eld was also 
concerned with aspects of devel op ment that 
lay beyond, over, or above the gene. 
 Th e epigen etic land scape image lost 
currency in the late 1960s to be replaced with 
the more precise notion of  DNA as code. Yet 
this image merits re- exam in a tion. As it was 
concep tu al ized, the epigen etic land scape 
linked time and space: the time it takes for 
some thing to develop from its pluri po tent to 
its diﬀ er en ti ated state, and the role of 
elements above the genes, the cell, even the 
envir on ment around the organ ism, in the 
devel op ment of new life. Although the young 
Waddington was inter ested in morpho gen-
esis – the explan a tion for how life took 
speciﬁ c form – because of his years of exper-
i ments on chick embryos, in his later years 
he under stood that the model for morpho-
gen esis embed ded in the epigen etic land-
scape could stretch beyond the indi vidual to 
the envir on mental and social. He exten ded 
the applic a tion of this image to express not 
merely the course of one cell’s devel op ment 
or the prob ab il ity that the cell would, over 
time, develop in one direc tion or another, but 
also the forces explain ing devel op ment and 
evol u tion of the natural and social envir on-
ments. As a core inﬂ u ence on the devel op-
ment of René Th om’s cata strophe theory, the 
epigen etic land scape can be under stood as 
an early model of the non- linear rela tions 
of the posthu man era, in which algorithms 
model the devel op ment of complex systems, 
linking 
indi vidu als, 
species, 
economic 
markets and the global climate. 
 Why return to this image aban doned in 
the rush to under stand genom ics and most 
recently epige n om ics? We might explore why 
this embry olo gist/geolo gist chose a work of 
art for his found a tional intel lec tual image, 
and why the abstract and schem atic graphic 
to which he then turned achieved great 
currency in the life sciences in the period just 
before the rise of the era of the gene as code. 
We might wonder what was lost with the 
turn to that second image, that ball on a 
ﬁ ssured hill that has become the classic 
version of the epigen etic land scape. What 
ecolo gies did Waddington invoke when he 
chose to repres ent the rela tion ship between 
gene and envir on ment unfold ing in the 
temporal course of devel op ment as a  land-
scape ? Did the epigen etic land scape contrib-
ute to our current vision of a general ecology? 
While the epigen etic land scape is currently 
under active recon cep tu al iz a tion across the 
life sciences, where it is serving less as a 
source of scientiﬁ c content than as a meth od-
o lo gical prompt, its form and func tion in the 
human it ies has yet to be explored. In that role 
we may indeed ﬁ nd its most power ful legacy. 
 See also Algorithm; Animal; Art; General 
Ecology. 
 Susan M. Squier 
 EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL 
THINKING)  
 Th e notion of ‘equa tion’ is relev ant to a 
posthu man gloss ary in that it illu min ates the
EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL THINKING)
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
ongoing discus sion between ration al ism 
and empir i cism. It fore grounds the urgency 
of ﬁ nding ways of account ing for an imper-
sonal cognit ive agency at work within math-
em at ics (and thereby within comput ing, 
within tech no logy) – and hence not only 
human ration al ity, but also the ration al ity 
attrib uted to nature. Th is entry hence 
supports the posthu man ist interest in a 
critique of such anthro po centric short cuts 
in that it discred its the view on math em at ics 
as a toolbox of purely object ive mech an isms: 
an imper sonal subject is at work amidst the 
univer sal ity of math em at ical objectiv ity (see 
 Maxwell’s Demon ). How to address it? 
 Th e math em at ical notion of the equa-
tion is ﬁ rst docu mented in the sixteenth 
century, when it seems to have been intro-
duced as what we would today call a 
 terminus tech ni cus for organ iz ing the prac-
tice of equal iz ing math em at ical expres-
sions. It seems to have been intro duced to 
European Renaissance science and philo-
sophy together with algebra: an  equa tion is 
the  math em at ical form for ration al iz ing and 
reas on ing iden tity. Th e term ‘algebra’ comes 
from Arabic  al- dschabr for the ‘the ﬁ tting 
together of broken parts’, and its ﬁ rst 
appear ance is usually refer enced to the title 
of the Persian scholar al-Chwarizmi’s book 
 Al-Kitāb al- muh

tasar fī hisāb al-ğabr wa-ʾl- 
muqābala (Th e Compendious Book on 
Calculation by Completion and Balancing). 
Two things are import ant to point out right 
ahead: the math em at ical term of an equa-
tion refer ences a math em at ical form for 
stating iden tity, and it does so precisely by 
 not assum ing iden tity to be given as a whole. 
In this regard, it crucially diﬀ ers from the 
iden tity notion in philo sophy – it helps to 
reason and ration al ize iden tity, but in the 
original sense of Greek  mathema , liter ally 
‘that which can be learnt’, and  math em at ics 
for ‘all that pertains to what can be learnt’. 
 Th rough this emphasis on learn ing 
(rather than knowing), and hence on math-
em at ics as an  art , the equa tional notion of 
iden tity is always already in pact with the 
math em at ical irra tional (the inﬁ n it ary). It 
remains undeter mined with regard to 
whether iden tity as a postu lated prin ciple is 
to be regarded as a logical device, or whether 
there is to be assumed a substan tial reality of 
this prin ciple in nature that can empir ic ally 
be studied in physics ( Monod 1972 : 100–1; 
see also  Invariance ). Th is undeter mined ness 
is indeed the key aspect which Michel Serres 
attrib utes to algebra for the advent of modern 
science and its paradigm of exper i ment a tion 
at large: exper i ment a tion, inven tion, consist 
in making the cypher under which nature 
hides appear, he main tains. ‘At the begin ning 
of the seven teenth century, when what we 
came to call the applied sciences ﬁ rst made 
their appear ance, a theory spreads that one 
can ﬁ nd in several authors, although none of 
them is its sole source, which seeks to 
account for a harmony that is not self- 
evident’ ( Serres 2001 : 140). Rather than 
looking at concep tual iden tity as the provider 
for self- evident harmony to look for in 
nature, what begins to spread, since Galileo 
and certainly with Descartes, Leibniz, 
Pascale, Fontenelle, so Serres, is ‘the idea that 
nature is written in math em at ical language’ 
(ibid.). But Serres imme di ately points to the 
insuﬃ    ciency of the term language here; he 
points out the constitutive role of algebra for 
the role of math em at ics in exper i ment a tion, 
and speciﬁ es that 
  in fact math em at ics is not a language: 
rather, nature is coded. Th e inven tions of 
the time do not boast of having wrested 
nature’s linguistic secret from it, but of 
having found the key to the cypher. 
Nature is hidden behind a cypher. 
Mathematics is a code, and since it is not 
arbit rary, it is rather a cypher. 
 (ibid.) 
 Serres’ speak ing of cypher here is to be 
taken in a math em at ical sense: cypher is a
EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL THINKING) 
term for how, in math em at ical nota tion, 
 nought can be expressed. It liter ally meant 
zero, from the Arabic term  sifr , for zero. A 
cipher consti tutes a code that aﬀ ords 
encryp tion and decryp tion such that once 
the oper a tions have been performed, the 
‘text’ or ‘message’ – nature, in Serres’ cited 
passage – that it envel ops has not been 
aﬀ ected by these oper a tions. Algebra, as 
the art of spec u lat ive comple tion and 
balan cing, exper i ment ally searches for the 
code  without having it to start with : the 
equa tional notion of iden tity hence is 
capable of organ iz ing the prac tice of equal-
iz ing math em at ical expres sions in exper i-
mental manner. ‘Now, since this idea [i.e. 
that the harmony to be sought is not self- 
evident but depends upon exper i ment, 
 VB ] in fact consti tutes the inven tion or the 
discov ery,’ Serres contin ues, ‘nature is 
hidden twice. First under the cypher. Th en 
under a dexter ity, a modesty, a subtlety, 
which prevents our reading the cypher 
even from an open book. Nature hides 
under a cypher. Experimentation, inven-
tion, consist in making it appear’ (ibid.). 
 Th is emphasis on an equa tional iden tity 
notion, whose determ in a tion correl ates 
with its artic u la tion in the char ac ters of a 
cipher and by the rules of a code, bears two 
great prom ises: (1) it aﬀ ords a think ing that 
is capable of leaving its object – that which 
it envel ops in code and makes appear – 
unaﬀ ected, and thus gives new support to a 
scientiﬁ c notion of objectit iv ity; (2) this 
think ing proceeds algorith mic ally and 
form ally, and hence can be extern al ized 
into a mech an ism that can perform it 
decoupled from a human cogito, but at the 
same time this does not liber ate thought 
from master ship and liter acy. For ‘reading’ 
this cypher behind which ‘nature hides’ 
crucially depends upon dexter ity, modesty 
and subtlety. In other words: a reas on ing 
that can be extern al ized into a mech an ism, 
and hence render obvious a not self- 
evident harmony (an inter play of parts that 
func tion well, work together ﬁ ttingly, etc.), 
must be considered strictly decoupled 
from any notion of truth: in this sense 
equa tional iden tity is genu inely abstract. 1   
 Th is article indexes Alfred North 
Whitehead’s  Treatise on Universal Algebra of 
abstract ness begins to ﬁ nd a novel embod i-
ment in ‘inform a tion’. It will trace some of 
the ‘genet ical’ herit age of math em at ical 
abstrac tion whose lineages come together 
here. 2 When Whitehead wrote his  Treatise , 
algebra needed to be addressed by means of 
what he sugges ted to think of as ‘a compar at-
ive study’ because it had given rise to ‘various 
Systems of Symbolic Reasoning’ ( Whitehead 
1910 : vi). And those Systems of Symbolic 
Reasoning, as Whitehead calls them, had 
been looked upon ‘with some suspi cion’ by 
math em aticians and logi cians alike – as 
Whitehead puts it: ‘Symbolic Logic has been 
disowned by many logi cians on the plea that 
its interest is math em at ical, and by many 
math em aticians on the plea that its interest 
is logical’ ( Whitehead 1910 : vi). 3 Th is confu-
sion – liter ally, mater i ally, a conﬂ u ence of 
‘clar it ies’ – consti tutes the spec trum through 
which math em at ics, since the early twen ti-
eth century, poses ‘post mod ern’ chal lenges 
to every philo sophy concerned with separ-
at ing legit im ate state ments from ille git im ate 
ones ( Jean-François Lyotard 1984 [1979] ). 4 
Today, we encounter Whitehead’s algebra 
(systems of symbolic reas on ing) in the ‘arti-
ﬁ  cial languages’ artic u lated by computers – 
whereby calling it a ‘language’ is neither 
speak ing in a meta phor ical nor in a clearly 
deﬁ ned manner. Th e chal len ging ques tion 
that arises from the sheer perform ativ ity of 
algebra’s abstract ness is, from a philo soph-
ical perspect ive, how to acknow ledge that 
there  exists some thing like ‘math em at ical 
think ing’. Th is is a chal lenge for the modern 
tradi tion of science, with its dualism between 
nature (object ive) and culture (subject ive),
EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL THINKING)
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
because it points out a certain imper sonal 
subject (thought) amidst the very reign of 
objectiv ity (meas ure ment and calcu la tion). 
 Until the late nine teenth century, algebra 
was used almost synonym ously with a 
theory of equa tions, and its symbol ical 
notion was thought to encode quant ity in its 
clas sical double- artic u la tion as magnitude 
(metrical, answer ing to  how much ? presup-
pos ing a notion of unit) and multi tude 
(count able, answer ing to  how many ? presup-
pos ing a notion of number). When 
Whitehead wrote his  Treatise , this had 
changed: with Cantor’s count able inﬁ n it ies 
(among many other factors that had been 
contrib uted, to name only a few of the most 
import ant names, by William Rowan 
Hamilton, Richard Dedekind, George Boole 
and Hermann Günther Grassmann), the 
clas sical distinc tion between multi tude and 
magnitude had given way to a more abstract 
distinc tion between ordin al ity (answer ing  to 
the howmani est? as in  ﬁ rst ,  second ,  third , etc., 
thereby imply ing an order ing place- value 
grid) and cardin al ity ( how many ? as in  one , 
 two ,  three , thereby imply ing the discrete ness 
of the count able) (cf.  Stenlund 2014 ). Th e 
gener al ized quant ity notion was now that of 
‘sets’; the status of math em at ics with regard 
to philo sophy and the natural sciences, but 
also with regard to linguistic form (struc tur-
al ism) and liter ary form (e.g. in Wittgenstein’s 
notion of ‘natural language’ as ‘math em at ical 
prose’) was profoundly unsettled thereby. 
Th is is what it means to say that math em at-
ics is no longer concerned with quant ity, but 
with symbol ical system ati city (ibid.). 
 With this, the gene a logy of the equa tion 
has come a long way, from the prac tice of 
equal iz ing math em at ical expres sions which 
once gave rise to the notion, and which 
then meant that arith metic could not only 
be done with numbers ( arith mos ) under-
stood in an Aristotelian sense (as onto lo-
gical science), but with what we could 
call ‘lettered/char ac ter ized numbers’ that 
entailed 
an 
inter me di ary 
symbol ical- 
nota tional form al ity (codes or polyto -
mistic alpha bets, elements that are not 
non- divis ible, atomic, but parti tion able in 
many ways). Th e decis ive aspect is not that 
letters of the alpha bet were newly used in 
math em at ics; 5 it is that alpha betic letters 
began to be used for the nota tion of numbers 
 in a manner that changed the concept of 
number : numbers, now, could be artic u lated 
as an inter play between vari able parts 
and constant parts. Th is was not the case 
in antiquity. Here, numbers were always 
determ in ate numbers of things, while the 
algeb raic concept of number works upon 
what is a ‘given’ only in the form of a metrical 
meas ure ment point. Eventually, this novel 
manner of think ing about numbers gave 
rise to soph ist ic ated proced ures of estim a-
tion like stochastic inter pol a tion and extra-
pol a tion. Mathematics thereby came to be 
seen as an activ ity, an intel lec tual and prac-
tical art, and the result ing geometry was 
referred to not as ‘element ary’ ( stochastiké , 
in the tradi tion of Euclid’s Elements), but as 
‘analyt ical’, ‘specious’, and even tu ally as 
‘popu la tion based’ (modern stochastics, 
prob ab il ist ics). Th e notion of a math em at-
ical  object was called by the early algeb ra ists 
 la cosa , the unknown – or not exhaust ively 
known – ‘thing’ ( Esteve 2008 ). 
 Th is novel notion of the object triggered 
in philo sophy (and in polit ics) the incep tion 
of concepts of  suﬃ   cient reason  on the one 
hand, and of  abso lut ism , liter ally meaning 
‘unres tric ted; complete, perfect’; also ‘not 
relat ive to some thing else’, 6   on the other 
hand. Not relat ive to some thing else meant 
for math em at ics that the role of propor tion 
(A is to B as C is to D) as the clas sical 
paradigm for analysis – liter ally the dissolv-
ing (from Greek - lysis , for ‘a loosen ing, 
setting free, releas ing, dissol u tion’; from 
 lyein  ‘to unfasten, loose, loosen, untie’) what 
is analogue (from Greek  analo gon ; from 
 ana ‘up to’ and  logos ‘account, ratio’) – was
EQUATION (MATHEMATICAL THINKING) 
gener al ized, and thereby also rela tiv ized; 
propor tion was now addressed as ‘propor-
tion al ity’, and reason was now relat ive to 
condi tions of possib il ity and the inclin-
a tions of dispos i tions (see  Architectonic 
Disposition ). Th e prac tices of equal iz ing 
math em at ical expres sions unfold in this 
gener al ized role of propor tion as propor-
tion al ity, and the notion of ‘equa tion’, with 
the symbolic forms of organ iz ing these 
prac tices, can be under stood as the tech nical 
term to express this rela tiv iz a tion of the 
analo gical struc ture of propor tion. It intro-
duced a novel art, the  ars combin at oria , and 
the prac tice of algeb ra ic ally equal iz ing 
math em at ical expres sions culmin ated with 
Newton’s and Leibniz’s inﬁ n ites imal calcu lus 
as a novel  math esis univer salis  (a univer sal 
method) which triggered a ﬁ erce dispute in 
the eight eenth century between philo soph-
ical Rationalism (baroque- ish and ‘ortho dox’ 
in spirit) and Empiricism (reform a tion ist 
and ‘modern ist’ in spirit). Immanuel Kant’s 
notion of the tran scend ental, together with 
his pro gramme of critique for philo sophy, 
even tu ally relaxed the disputes (tempor ar-
ily) 7  . Algebra, as the theory of equa tions, was 
now to provide insights not about the nature 
of elements imme di ately, but in rules that 
can be deduced from Natural Laws that 
reign in physics. Mechanics came to be seen 
as a partic u lar case of a more general physics, 
includ ing dynam ics and soon there aft er 
also ther mo dy nam ics. It was now the formu-
la tion of these laws (no longer that of mech-
an ical prin ciples) that was to be stated in the 
form of equa tions, access ible crit ic ally 
through empir ical exper i ment coupled with 
exact concep tual reas on ing, and hence 
decoupled from an aﬃ  rm a tion of any meta-
phys ical (and theo lo gical) assump tions in 
partic u lar. 8,   9  
 Th is is the modern ity with which 
Lyotard’s ‘compu ter ized soci et ies’ inev it ably 
have to break: the formu la tion of laws is 
equa tional, and it is because of this that laws 
ought perhaps best to be under stood along 
the lines of what Michel Serres calls ‘the 
natural contract’ (1991). Without such an 
account, the modern ist decoup ling of science 
from notions of the tran scend ent is being 
replaced with a funda ment al ist (scient ist) 
coup ling up of exper i mental insight (empir i-
cism) with the uncrit ical aﬃ  rm a tion of a 
partic u lar anthro po lo gical or soci olo gical or 
ecolo gical assump tion (ration al ism as realist 
reason; see  Negentropy ). 
 See 
also 
Architectonic 
Disposition; 
Negentropy; Invariance.
the history of math em at ics; it is a bifurc a-
tion aft er many centur ies of using one and 
the same script for linguistic as well as 
math em at ical artic u la tions. Cf. Schubring 
( 2016 ).  
  6. 
See the  Online Etymology Dictionary , 
 www.etymon line.com ; also Jacobs ( 2010 ). 
 7. 
It seems not entirely implaus ible, at least, 
to think about the early twen ti eth- century 
found a tional crisis as a continu ation of 
just these disputes on higher levels of 
abstrac tion. For a largely unbiased account 
and a serious and open- minded sugges-
tion of how to approach the dilemma, see 
Weyl ( 1994 ).  
 8. 
Due to its brevity, this summary follows 
the lineage in the crit ical tradi tion that has 
turned out as the predom in ant one, 
linking twentieth-century analyt ical as 
well as contin ental philo sophy; it thereby 
under states the ideas of Leibniz, Lambert 
and others, who main tained that algebra, 
by its calcu lat ory and symbolic methods, 
could actu ally be seen as opening up the 
closed ness of clas sical logics in the 
Aristotelian tradi tion, thereby intro du cing 
an  ars inveniendi , an  art of inven tion into 
logics – an approach that was still pursued 
by ﬁ gures as eminent for the nine teenth- 
century devel op ment of algebra as Charles 
Sanders Peirce (abduc tion) or Richard 
Dedekind (abstrac tion as a creat ive act). 
Against these ideas, Kant famously stated: 
‘Die Logik ist . . . keine allge meine 
Erﬁ ndungskunst und kein Organon der 
Wahrheit; – keine Algebra, mit deren 
Hülfe 
sich 
verborgene 
Wahrheiten 
entdecken ließen’ (1800; here cited in 
 Peckhaus 2006 ). For an intro duc tion to the 
conﬂ icts the unsettled status of algebra 
triggered in the empir ical sciences them-
selves, see Stengers ( 2010 ), espe cially Book 
 II ,  Th e Invention of Mechanics, Power and 
Reason , 68ﬀ ., therein ‘Th e Lagrangian 
Event’ (112ﬀ .) and ‘Abstract Measurement: 
Putting Th ings to Work’ (129ﬀ .).   
 9. Th e seminal study on the implic a tions of 
this for axio mat ics is by Robert Blanché 
( 1980 ); there is an English edition of this 
book by Geoﬀ rey Keene (1962), but it 
excludes the crucial two chapters with 
which Blanché ends his study, discuss ing 
the implic a tions for science and for 
philo sophy. On the gene a logy of philo-
soph ical notions of neces sity and contin-
gency, and the relat ively recent upheavals 
with regard to this gene a logy, see also 
Vuillemin ( 1996 ;  2009 ). 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 ETHEREAL SCENT  
 The Sense of Smell and the 
Posthuman Experience 
 People stink in science ﬁ ction movies. 
Heavily perspir ing, they toil to survive an 
over pop u lated planet earth ( Elysium ), a 
dump of apoca lyptic propor tions ( Wall-E ) 1 
or in a disin teg rat ing urban agglom er a tion 
on a global scale ( Blade Runner ). Th e wet 
spots under their armpits and on their backs, 
the dirty worn clothes and their hair that 
hangs in sweaty strands over their fore heads 
give away the human condi tion in all its 
future greas i ness. Th e indi vidu als who can 
aﬀ ord it have left  Earth and live in highly 
tech no lo gized 
envir on ments 
that 
are 
immacu late, sterile and above all inodor ous. 
In these feature ﬁ lms the diﬀ er ence between 
human and tech no logy exposes itself also 
through the nose.  Th e Matrix is exem plary of 
this: everything connec ted to human(ity) is 
dirty and smelly and the world of the 
machines (the matrix) is clean. Th e rebel 
forces live and work in the decrepit space ship 
 Nebuchadnezzar . 2 Th ey dress in worn- out 
tatters where the sweat stains are clearly 
visible. In Zion – the last vestige of free and 
pure human ity – they party in a moist orgy. 
When Neo, Morpheus, Trinity and the other 
rebels upload in the matrix, all char ac ter ist ics
ETHEREAL SCENT 
of human ity seem to disap pear. Th e tight 
costumes they wear, the sunglasses they use 
to shield their pure souls from the false truth 
of the hyper real ity, and the super hu man 
forces they exhibit, mirror the power ful and 
eﬃ   cient systems they ﬁ ght. But even in this 
arti ﬁ  cial world of the matrix their human ity 
reveals itself through smell. While inter rog-
at ing a heavily sweat ing Morpheus, Agent 
Smith confesses he partic u larly can’t stand 
the smell of humans: ‘I feel satur ated by it. I 
can taste your stink. And every time I do I 
feel I have somehow been infec ted by it. It’s 
repuls ive, isn’t it?’ Th at there is no such thing 
as smell in the matrix makes this fact even 
more signi ﬁ c ant. Humanity, unboun ded by a 
biolo gical body, fragrantly satur ates all 
possible nodes of the network computer 
systems that construct the matrix. 
 Smell is an integ ral part of the body but 
also separ ate from it. Th at char ac ter istic 
makes it the ideal vessel to tran scend oneself. 
Since antiquity, perfume has always had a 
tran scend ental func tion. In ancient Egypt 
smell played an import ant role in rituals. 
Th e gods were considered to be fragrant 
beings. Besides, smell was considered to 
have protect ive worth. Th e well- known wax 
cones the Egyptians wore on their heads 
fulﬁ lled a ritual value. Th ey guided the 
spirits of the deceased in their trans ition to 
the world of the dead. In the Middle Ages, 
smell was also a means to contact the super-
nat ural. Art histor ian Caro Verbeek argues 
that the incense diﬀ used during holy mass 
was a spir itual medium. To the twelft h- 
century mystic Hildegard von Bingen, 
smoke was the most appro pri ate means to 
commu nic ate with God because – just like 
Him – it is invis ible and it exceeds our intel-
lect. 3 Today we see a revival of this spir itual 
power of fragrance in ether eal oils, scented 
candles, aroma ther apy and potpourri mixes 
used in new- age-styled faith. Smell plays an 
import ant part in self- healing and the spir-
itual cleans ing of the home. Th e aromas that 
are used in these  rituals are oft en synthetic 
deriv at ives of the smell of the wild. Th ey 
create a better, more intense and controlled 
(i.e. hyper real) exper i ence of nature than 
real nature. And in their intens ity they create 
an immers ive exper i ence similar to the one 
gener ated by the matrix. But whereas the 
cine matic exper i ence is mostly visual, this 
one uses fragrance to trans port the body to 
other spheres, as was done in the exper i-
ments with smell in the cinema from the 
early 1900s onwards. From Hans Laube’s 
patent for Smell-O-Vision and Morton 
Heilig’s Sensorama to the virtual reality 
systems of the nineties designed to eﬀ ect-
ively immerse gamers, and the more recent 
smell- o-internet or i- smell and o- phone, 4 
they all turned to smell as the next level in 
creat ing simu la tions that give an exper i ence 
that is more real than reality. 
 Th is 
sens it iv ity 
to 
the 
embod ied 
human exper i ence was lost during the 
Enlightenment. Descartes separ ated body 
and mind and in this act created the modern 
human subject that can perceive, know and 
rule the world by the power of the ratio. Th e 
matrix as inform a tional space is a contem-
por ary repres ent a tion of this world of the 
mind. However, just as Neo as ‘Th e One’ 
even tu ally succeeds in uniting body and 
mind, nature and culture, biology and tech-
no logy, today in our tech no lo gical society 
we see a reappraisal for the body as it is 
deﬁ ned as an inform a tion processing 
system. Th e body as inform a tion is no longer 
cent rally organ ized by the ratio of the indi-
vidual subject. Just as the other inform a tion 
processing systems, as wetware it is part of 
the  infosphere . As such it can be regu lated 
and adapted by means of biotech no logy. In 
this sphere, smell is one of the signals that 
can be coded, manip u lated and networked. 
Th e prot ag on ists in science ﬁ ction ﬁ lms still 
stank. Th e posthu man, as hybrid species 
between biology and tech no logy, creates its 
own atmo sphere to design itself and to
commu nic ate with other human and non- 
human creatures in its network. 
 See also Sensing Practices; Art; Post-
humanism; Noise.
EXECUTION 
 Trevor Paglen,  Trinity Cube , 2015, irra di ated glass from the Fukushima Exclusion Zone, Trinitite, 
20 × 20 × 20 cm. COURTESY OF THE ARTIST AND DON’T FOLLOW THE WIND.  
work’s inner core is made out of Trinitite, 
the mineral created on 16 July 1945 when 
the United States exploded the world’s ﬁ rst 
atomic bomb near Alamogordo, New 
Mexico, heating the desert’s surface to the 
point where it turned surface sand into a 
green ish glass. 
 Trinity Cube  was created by melting 
these two forms of glass together into a 
cube, then installing the cube back into the 
Fukushima Exclusion Zone as part of the 
 Don’t Follow the Wind project curated by 
the Don’t Follow the Wind Collective 
(Chim ↑ Pom, Kenji Kubota, Eva and 
Franco Mattes, Jason Waite), Fukushima, 
2015 – ongoing). Th e artwork will be view-
able by the public when the Exclusion 
Zone opens again, any time between three 
and thirty thou sand years from the present. 
 See also  Expulsions; Extinction; Geo-
Hydro-Solar-Bio-Techno-Politics. 
 Trevor Paglen 
 EXECUTION  
 Execution is a func tion that oper ates 
within a range of systems, such as language, 
compu ta tion or biology. Th e follow ing 
entry traces a few of these instan ti ations 
of execu tion in order to high light the 
mater ial discurs ive quality of any partic u lar
execut ing system, with the discus sion 
moving across law and guil lot ine, language 
and  langue , computer instruc tion and 
memory. In each case tracing the way in 
which execu tion produces situ ated posthu-
man coup lings in a dynamic ensemble of 
such conjug at ing systems. 
 Th e word execu tion stems from 
 l’exécuteur du test a ment (twelft h- century 
French), desig nat ing the executor of the 
will. Here we see how execu tion is from its 
incep tion embed ded in regu lat ory forms of 
bureau cracy ( Vallaro 2005 ). Th e ancestor of 
the executor of the will was the  bour r eau , 
whose func tion goes at least as far back 
as Ancient Rome, and who performed 
execu tions decreed by the court, with 
punish ment acting here as spec tacle and 
demon stra tion of power, perceived as a 
means to socially regu late crime and 
disobedi ence. Th is social func tion was 
actu al ized in the public square, where 
behead ings took place  live . As an eﬀ ec tu-
ation of a sentence, execu tion always relates 
to the now, to an actu al iz a tion, a pres ence 
which is always already over. 
 Execution in this instance then is not 
dying, but speciﬁ c ally to be deprived of 
being. It is not deceas ing, nor is it homicide, 
it is death by punish ment. It is sudden 
death forced upon a body of punish ment 
which has no control over the viol ence 
executed by the system. In these iconic, 
self- pres en cing actu al iz a tions, we are made 
to force fully witness execu tion’s quality as 
an event, an act of a juridical, polit ical, 
tech nical or biolo gical discourse enacted 
decis ively upon its sentenced subject. 
 Language can be seen as such a discurs-
ive system, one that executes by consist ing 
of two separ ate dimen sions:  langue and 
 parole ( Saussure 1916 ).  Langue as the 
system of language is the form al ized struc-
ture, the under ly ing system of distinct 
signs, oppos ing  parole , which is artic u lated 
speech. Th us  parole  is the exec ut ive side of 
language. Th e point of note in this instance 
is that exer cising language is not a shift  
from the non- linguistic to the linguistic. 
It is the actu al iz a tion and execu tion of a 
system into an instance of discourse. 
 In rela tion to this, subjectiv ity in 
language is insep ar able from the moment 
of execu tion, the instance in which language 
as system becomes language- in-use (when 
 langue is conver ted into  parole ). An execu-
tion deict ic ally desig nates a speaker, there-
fore it is when enter ing language and 
convert ing the virtual system to actual use 
that the subject is consti tuted ( Benveniste 
1958 ). However, the subject evap or ates in its 
own artic u la tion of itself as it becomes a 
mere prop erty of a symbolic system. 
Execution of language is thus related to the 
‘killing of the subject’ ( Barthes 1968 ) – it is 
in the actu al iz a tion of the language system 
that the speak ing subject produces itself as 
an abstrac tion separ ated from a body. 
Executable systems like language can there-
fore be said to be inher ently violent, eﬀ ec tu-
at ing a killing, be it abstract or literal. 
 Th e tongue, the embod ied execu tioner 
of language, the inter face of execut ing 
 langue , both gobbles and babbles. Following 
 Bourreau tranchant la tête d’une condam née 
(Exécution de Léonora Galigaï, 1617).  PUBLIC 
DOMAIN IMAGE.
EXECUTION 
Michel Serres’ account of the ﬁ ve (human) 
senses, every time an organ – or func tion 
– is liber ated from an old duty, it re- invents 
itself ( Serres 2001 ). As Hominina 1 stood up 
from her quad ruped ancestor, the tongue, 
freed from the vital neces sity to sense 
danger, became a univer sal tool ( Serres 
2014 : 2). According to Serres, the ‘infor-
m a tion imper at ive’ is to receive, store, 
process and emit inform a tion. Th e tongue’s 
embed ded subjectiv ity has become a 
literal geograph ical expan sion of the post- 
indus trial and the nutraceut ical 2 market. 
It divides bodies between obese/skinny, 
food between organic/fair- trade. It clears 
Amazonian rain forests for soya plant a tions 
used for feeding live stock ( Morton et  al. 
2006 ). It frac tions popu la tions between 
young high- paid social entre pren eurs and 
the viol ently displaced. Th e tongue is a 
decis ive and divis ive organ of gentri ﬁ c a-
tion and land forming. 
 Such discurs ive systems divide and 
conquer, working to make entit ies execut-
able accord ing to their partic u lar logics 
and delim ited needs. In his found a tional 
article ‘On Computable Numbers, with an 
Application to the Entscheidungsproblem’, 
Alan Turing provides a deﬁ n i tion of 
comput ab il ity as that capable of being 
enumer ated and made into eﬀ ect ively 
calcul able algorithms for execu tion upon 
and by machines (1936). In the further 
mater i al iz a tion of Turing’s thesis into 
actual comput ing machines, the act of 
making things discrete, so as to be comput-
able, becomes one of estab lish ing machine- 
read able  cuts . Th ese are the switch able on 
and oﬀ  state elements, or ﬂ ip- ﬂ ops that are 
enacted at the level of logic gates used to 
store and control data ﬂ ow. Such ﬂ ip pable 
states consti tute the mater ial basis that 
allows for the writing and running of the 
execut able binary instruc tions of machine 
code upon this ‘manic cutter known as the 
computer’ ( Kittler 2010 : 228). 
 Such cuts – execu tion performed by 
compu ta tion – are expressed at the temporal 
dimen sion of code execu tion, constantly 
render ing the now in networked and pervas-
ive condi tions. Th e fetch–execute cycle in 
comput ing is used to describe the oper a-
tional steps of perform ing code instruc tions 
by a Central Processing Unit (or  CPU ) 
follow ing its clock cycle. A  CPU fetches each 
instruc tion from the memory and breaks it 
down into micro- instruc tions, includ ing the 
controlling oper a tion sequence, comput ing, 
trans fer ring, reading, updat ing and storing 
data in memory ( Burrell 2004 ). Th us what is 
written in a piece of source code should only 
be regarded as a partial instruc tion within a 
wider, dynamic ecology of many execut ing 
systems. When extend ing the notion of 
execu tion into any dynamic networked 
envir on ment in which things are networked 
seam lessly and data is processed continu-
ously, there are diﬀ er ent ‘micro- decisions’ 
that are executed at the level of network 
proto cols to control and regu late the trans-
mis sion of data ( Sprenger 2015 ). Such deep 
internal and oper a tional struc tures of 
compu ta tion, data processing and digital 
networks execute a distinct ive rhythm and 
tempor al ity; a compu ta tional form of 
‘micro- tempor al ity’ ( Ernst 2013 : 57). 3 Th ese 
compu ta tional cuts and micro- decisions are 
inter twined, dynamic and subject to change 
at any moment in time. In other words, 
execu tion 
involves 
micro- instruc tions, 
micro- oper a tions and a micro- tempor al ity 
of things where codes, mater i als and actions 
are composed in a dynamic envir on ment. 
Th is micro- temporal dimen sion of execu-
tion again draws atten tion to the phenom-
ena of liveness; the dynam ics of execu tion 
that constantly render the  now . 
 Any such cuts in the name of execut-
abil ity can be compared to what Karen 
Barad refers to as ‘agen tial cuts’ (2007: 429). 
Th ey are made in the name of a certain 
agency; in the case of computer code,
a compu ta tional agency. In its level ling of 
all data into a binary form of on and 
oﬀ , compu ta tional cuts enact a radical 
and seem ingly non- discurs ive treat ment 
of inform a tion. Th e data struc tures of 
comput ing are notice able for the way 
in which they are partic u larly amen-
able to recon ﬁ g ur a tion and applic a tion 
towards a range of oper a tions ( Lovelace 
and Menabrea 1842 ). Such a chan ging of 
states and conﬁ g ur a tions is, unsur pris-
ingly, oft en strongly felt by any entit ies 
brought into contact with their execut ing 
logics. Turing himself was made to be 
acutely aware of this exec ut ive power of 
code, whether program mable, polit ical or 
cultural. Deﬁ nable as a war hero accord-
ing to one set of patri otic para met ers, he 
soon found himself rapidly switched from 
national saviour back to sexual deviant 
and crim inal to be perse cuted by the state. 
Computable accord ing to some logics and 
conﬁ g ur a tions; uncom put able accord ing 
to others. Such is the poten tial power and 
viol ence of any cut and its execut ab il ity. 
 Th is viol ence of entangled and oft en 
compet ing execut able logics inev it ably 
leaves ‘marks on bodies’, in which the 
marks are ‘the diﬀ er ences mater i al ized’ 
( Barad 2007 : 89). From Turing’s chem ical 
castra tion to the growth of synapses cata-
lysed by repeated stim u lus, organ isms bear 
the marks of inscrip tion and execu tion. 
Implicit memory, in the Pavlovian tradi-
tion, is inscribed into long- term memory 
through habitu ation. Th e envir on ment is 
constantly execut ing memory. Such is the 
power and force of trauma that it boot-
straps long- term memory creation ( Kandel 
2006 : 342). Nevertheless, memory is also 
 forget ting , a dynamic process of constant 
read/write execu tion. Th e recall ing of 
memor ies is based on chem ical exchanges 
within highly mutable synaptic networks 
that require protein synthesis ( Nader, 
Schafe and Le Doux. 2000 ). As memory is 
react iv ated, it mutates. Memory becomes 
an ongoing site of execu tion, rather than 
one of static storage, in which both habitu-
ation and dele tion are crucial. Th e brain 
actively erases inform a tion as part of its 
regu lat ory processes ( Hadziselimovic et al. 
2014 ). In the absence of this regu lat ory 
func tion, a human becomes crippled by a 
form of neur o lo gical condi tion called 
hyper thyme sia. 4   Erasure and death are 
regu lat ory func tions performed through 
execu tion and its continu ous actu al iz a tion. 
 Th e very etymo logy of execu tion is 
admin is trat ive, and as a regu lat ory 
processing of living beings, bureau cracy is 
the perform ance of the law. But a violent 
disjunc tion occurs in the conﬂ a tion of law 
and execu tion: the state of excep tion; or 
the conﬂ a tion of death and execu tion: 
capital punish ment. Cuts, which are inher-
ently exclu sion ary, also contain a ready 
poten tial of violent impos i tions of a system 
onto bare life ( Agamben 2005 ). If the cut 
and its execu tion mater i al ize on the one 
hand in the actu al iz a tion of an event, they 
can also, in biopol it ical fashion, take on an 
oper at ive func tion as a self- perpetu at ing 
 threat of viol ence to come. Such menacing 
 poten tial events of crisis become import-
ant in actual execu tion, helping to prompt 
a range of pre- emptive forms of violent 
coded logics and crisis- oriented forms of 
execu tion (Cox 2015;  Chun 2016 ). 
 Execution situ ates and is situ ated. 
Whether via the tongue, the guil lot ine, the 
 CPU or the synapses, execu tion produces 
integ ral coup lings of subjectiv ity and 
desub jectiv ity through systems such as 
those of language, of judi ciary, of compu ta-
tion and of memory. A power ful force, 
leaving marks on bodies and indelible trau-
matic memor ies. Such ecolo gies of execu-
tion are mani fold, and the eﬀ ec tu ation of a 
system is always conjug at ing amongst a 
mesh of other hetero gen eous agents, 
processes, ener gies and mater ial strata.
EXPULSIONS 
 See also Non- human Agency; Mattering; 
Ecosophy; 
Extinction; 
Necropolitics; 
Violence.
condi tion of this ‘surplus’ is the accel er at-
ing expanse of territ ory that is devast ated 
– by poverty and disease, armed conﬂ ict, 
brutal extrac tions of natural wealth by 
national and foreign ﬁ rms (see  Sassen 
2014 : chs 2 and 4). And then there are the 
govern ments rendered dysfunc tional by 
acute corrup tion and a crip pling inter na-
tional debt- regime, all of it leading to an 
extreme inab il ity or lack of will to address 
their peoples’ needs ( Sassen 2016b ). To this 
we should add the sharp increase in large- 
scale land- acquis i tions by foreign ﬁ rms 
and govern ments (ibid.). 2 Th ese land grabs 
are gener at ing addi tional mass displace-
ments of whole villages and small holder 
agri cul ture districts, all replaced by vast 
plant a tions which use excess ive fertil izers 
and pesti cides, thereby rapidly killing the 
land, which will in turn lead to yet another 
phase of land grabs and the result ing 
displace ments. 
 It is this second emer ging condi tion 
marked by extract ive logics that concerns 
me here. It goes against the famil iar notion 
that our modern ity is marked by an irres-
ist ible growth in organ iz a tional and tech-
no lo gical complex ity. In vast stretches of 
our very modern world, we see shift s from 
the complex to the element ary: from the 
complex encas ing of land that is the 
doctrine of ‘national sover eign territ ory’, to 
land in devast ated nation- states as a 
commod ity to be sold on the global market; 
and from the complex ity of people as 
citizens to people as surplus – to be ware-
housed, displaced, traﬃ   cked, reduced to 
mere labour ing bodies and body organs. I 
ﬁ nd that one crit ical compon ent of these 
shift s that matters to my analysis is how 
much of the sharp rise in complex systems, 
instru ments and know ledge winds up 
produ cing these kinds of simple brutal it ies. 
 In short, too many of our increas ingly 
complex capab il it ies and know ledges do 
not even produce  complex brutal outcomes 
that are visible to us all. Th us a dam, for 
instance, makes visible its complex ity and 
its enorm ous capa city to destroy whole 
areas of a region, submer ging their villages 
and monu ments and such. Th is type of 
visib il ity is absent, for instance, in the case 
of the complex ﬁ nan cial instru ments that 
can extract value from redu cing the wages 
of millions of garment workers sewing 
simple cloth ing: extremely low wages can 
raise the stock- market value of the shares 
of the pertin ent corpor ate ﬁ rms because 
they show the ﬁ rm is willing to maxim ize 
value extrac tion. Th is is a much- over-
looked factor in crit ical analyses of low 
wages. 
 Th ere are, thus, two vectors in the 
search for low- wage labour. Th e famil iar 
one is that the ﬁ rm can sell its products at 
a low price. But the far more signi ﬁ c ant 
vector in the corpor at iz ing of more and 
more economic sectors is a posit ive valu-
ation in the stock market when a ﬁ rm 
demon strates a will to lower costs no 
matter what – exploited workers, unsafe 
work places, envir on mental destruc tion 
and more. Th is is a profoundly insi di ous 
overlay to an already damaging search for 
mere low wages. It also feeds into a massive 
distor tion of how we construct value in a 
corpor at ized economy that is increas ingly 
part of a ﬁ nan cial iz ing process. 
 Beyond the speciﬁ cs described above, 
we see a spread of this combin a tion of 
rising complex ity and expand ing element-
ary extractions. It generates multiplier 
eﬀ ects for one side of the process (large 
corpor a tions, ﬁ nan cial markets) even as it 
destroys the less advantaged. It weaves 
itself into how we measure the ‘growth’ of 
our econom ies – for instance  GDP per 
capita – and gener ates an acute distor tion 
as to what is valu able, what adds to 
‘economic growth’. Replacing small holder 
agri cul ture with corpor ate plant a tions is 
registered as a massive growth in  GDP per
EXPULSIONS 
capita. But it actu ally destroys the land 
rather quickly and buries the know ledge of 
small hold ers about how to ensure a long 
life for land (notably, rotat ing crops that 
ensure fertil ity and minim ize pests). 
Similarly in urban econom ies, repla cing 
mom and pop shops (for selling ﬂ owers, or 
food, or a good latte) with a corpor ate 
outlet sucks know ledge (it takes know-
ledge and exper i ence to run a mom and 
pop shop) and proﬁ ts out of the local ity 
and passes it on to central headquar ters. 
Th e local ity loses capab il it ies and, further-
more, part of its collect ive consump tion 
capa city goes to headquar ters rather than 
re- circu lat ing in the local ity. Corporate 
headquar ters make gains. And these gains, 
further, can trans late into posit ive valu-
ations of their shares in the stock market. 
Th is shift  is meas ured as a growth in  GDP 
per capita so experts and govern ments see 
it as a posit ive. 
 Th ese examples illus trate one aspect of 
what I mean by the systemic edge: it is that 
point in a process when our exist ing 
categor ies (analyt ical, concep tual, stat ist-
ical) can no longer capture what is going 
on. Th ere are simple and there are complex 
instan ti ations. 
 Th e second major domain where I 
deploy this type of analyt ics concerns the 
biosphere. 3 Th e biosphere’s capa cit ies to 
renew land, water, and air are remark able. 
But they are predic ated on speciﬁ c tempor-
al it ies and life cycles that our tech nical, 
chem ical and organ iz a tional innov a tions 
are 
rapidly 
outpa cing. 
Industrialized 
econom ies have long done damage to the 
biosphere, but in at least some of these 
cases, and with time on her side, the 
biosphere has brought damaged land and 
water back to health. Current analyses and 
eval u ations signal that we have gone well 
beyond this capa city for recov ery in a 
growing range of condi tions. We now have 
vast stretches of land and water that are 
not merely damaged but plain dead – land 
over whelmed by the relent less use of 
chem ic als, and water dead from lack of 
oxygen due to pollu tion of all sorts. Th e 
surge of foreign land acquis i tions by 
govern ments and ﬁ rms examined above is 
one of many
clin ic ally dead oceanic coastal zones. We 
made this fragil ity and these deaths. 
 We can think of such dead land and 
dead water as holes in the tissue of the 
biosphere. And the edges of these holes are 
also systemic – they tell us some thing that 
is larger than the partic u lar site. I conceive 
of these holes as sites marked by the expul-
sion of biospheric elements from their life 
space, and as the surface expres sion of 
deeper subter ranean trends that are cutting 
across the world, regard less of the local 
type of politico- economic organ iz a tion. 
 As I examine at length in  Expulsions 
( Sassen 2014 ), we have collect ively 
produced condi tions that over ride national 
diﬀ er ences: my guiding concep tual eﬀ ort 
through out the exam in a tion of concrete 
cases across our planet was to make visible 
the 
recur rence 
of 
envir on ment ally 
destruct ive modes no matter how diverse 
the polit ical econom ies and polit ical 
systems in play. Together and over time, we 
have gener ated a plan et ary condi tion that 
reaches far beyond the speciﬁ c
EXTENDED COGNITION 
( Clark and Chalmers 1998 ). Th is stand-
point is that of active exter n al ism and 
reson ates with theor ies of embod ied (e.g. 
 Wilson and Foglia 2016 ), embed ded 
( Suchman 1987 ;  Hutchins 1995 ), enact ive 
( Varela, Th ompson and Rosch 1991 ) and 
situ ated cogni tion ( Smith 1999 ;  Robbins 
and Aydede 2009 ). Such a view of cogni-
tion not only has implic a tions for research 
in cognit ive science, robot ics and arti ﬁ  cial 
intel li gence but also chal lenges indi vidu al-
istic under stand ing of cogni tion as taking 
place exclus ively in the brain or even 
brain- body. To an extent that this model 
blurs the bound ar ies between tech nical 
objects and human agents in the domain 
of cogni tion, the exten ded mind thesis also 
ques tions the human excep tion al ism and 
anthro po centrism inher ent in more tradi-
tional cognit ive sciences. 
 Th e exten ded mind thesis was intro-
duced by Andy Clark and David Chalmers 
in their article ‘Th e Extended Mind’ in 
1998. In their essay they propose that reli-
ance on envir on mental support in some 
cases produces ‘epistemic actions’: actions 
that alter the world so as to aid and 
augment cogni tion ( Clark and Chalmers 
1998 ). Th is leads them to propose that 
such actions should also deserve epistemic 
credit: ‘if, as we confront some task, a part 
of the world func tions as a process which, 
 were it done in the head , we would have 
no hesit a tion in recog niz ing as part of the 
cognit ive process, then that part of the 
world  is . . . part of the cognit ive process’ 
(ibid.: 8). Th e latter is also what was coined 
as the ‘parity prin ciple’, which helps deﬁ ne 
when cogni tion is exten ded. Such exten-
ded minds are, in fact, cognit ive systems, 
where all elements play an active causal 
role, 
continu ously 
inﬂ u en cing 
and 
respond ing to one another and thus 
coordin at ing to produce beha viour ( Clark 
1997 ). 
 Clark and Chalmer’s essay consti tutes 
the basis of what is called the ‘ﬁ rst wave’ of 
argu ments for  EC , mostly based on the 
above- mentioned parity prin ciple ( Menary 
2010 ). Th e second wave of argu ments is 
developed in closer orient a tion to empir-
ical and enact ive approaches (see, for 
instance,  Sutton 2010 ;  Menary 2007 and 
 2010 ; 
 Wilson 
2010 ; 
 Wheeler 
2010 ; 
 Malafouris 
2013 ). 
Second- wave 
 EC 
thinkers high light that external elements 
and processes can diﬀ er dramat ic ally from 
internal ones ( Sutton 2010 ), and this diﬀ er-
ence is, in fact, required in order for 
‘external’ and ‘internal’ compon ents of the 
cognit ive process to be comple ment ary 
( Rowlands 2010a ) and integ rated into the 
cognit ive system ( Menary 2010 ). Finally, a 
third wave of argu ments is emer ging as 
well, focus sing on what Sutton calls ‘a 
deter rit ori al ized cognit ive science’ ( Sutton 
2010 ,  2013 ) that goes beyond the bound ar-
ies of biolo gical organ ism and deals rather 
with cognit ive assem blies in which none of 
the elements have analyt ical prior ity, as 
well as with ques tions of trans form a tion 
that occurs due to processes of exten sion 
and coup ling ( Kirchhoﬀ  2012 ). 
 One of the tradi tional lines of critique 
towards  EC is based on the claim that  EC 
performs a coup ling- consti tu tion fallacy: 
the fact that agents rely on certain external 
objects for cognit ive purposes, thus being in 
eﬀ ect cognit ively coupled with the object, 
does not mean that the object in ques tion 
consti tutes a part of the agent’s cognit ive 
appar atus (see, for instance,  Adams and 
Aizawa 2008 ,  2010 ). While this and similar 
critiques imply prior it iz ing clear bound ar-
ies of cogni tion and clear indic a tion of 
cognit ive agents, other crit ical voices 
suggest that  EC does not go far enough in 
dethron ing the biolo gic ally delin eated 
human as the main agent of cogni tion. 
For instance, Di Paolo ( 2009 ) proposes 
that in order to do away with biolo gical
chau vin ism and human- centred ness, an 
auto poi etic enact iv ist account of cogni tion 
is needed that would posi tion cogni tion 
as a rela tional phenomenon that emerges 
between autopoi etic systems and their 
inter ac tions with envir on ment. In this way 
a non- species-speciﬁ c deﬁ n i tion of cogni-
tion, agency and medi ation could be 
developed that does not completely deny 
the exten ded mind thesis. Kirchhoﬀ  ( 2012 ) 
also suggests that  EC should be pushed 
towards a deter rit ori al ized cognit ive science 
that dissolves the indi vidual and displaces 
agency, instead of marking it as an indi-
vidual (human?) prop erty. Th e ques tion of 
agency was also taken up by theor ists such 
as Wheeler, who asks what happens when 
tech no lo gies that are part of our cognit ive 
appar atus start exhib it ing agency them-
selves (see, for instance,  Wheeler 2011 ). All 
in all,  EC theory is import ant not only 
for cognit ive science and its methods 
(Should the object of study be indi vidual 
agents or cognit ive systems? Should we 
consider conscious ness as exten ded? See, 
for instance,  Rowlands 2010a ,  2010b on 
this ques tion) but also opens up new direc-
tions in arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence and robot ics 
research (via focus on inter act ive learn ing 
and react ive or beha viour- based robot ics; 
see  Brooks 2002 on the latter). 
 See also Artiﬁ cial Intelligence; Execution; 
Plasticity; Neocybernetics; Robophilosophy. 
 Goda Klumbytė 
 EXTINCTION  
 Extinction is at once the most human and 
the most inhuman of concepts. Th e very 
possib il ity of this contrary tend ency is the 
hall mark of our most fragile and most 
robust present. Th e twenty- ﬁ rst century is 
at one and the same time marked by a 
sense of impend ing human extinc tion 
(both liter ally, with the biolo gical species 
coming to an end, and ﬁ gur at ively, with all 
that passes itself oﬀ  as human facing anni-
hil a tion by way of tech no lo gical, ecolo gical 
and polit ical cata strophe);  and  at the same 
time human ity has declared itself to be a 
geolo gical force with the power and will to 
recog nize and reverse the changes it has 
made to the Earth as a living system. In 
what follows I outline three artic u la tions 
of the concept of extinc tion, all of which 
are inex tric ably inter twined with the 
problem of the human. 
 First, and most obvi ously, extinc tion 
announces itself today as the sixth great 
mass extinc tion. Humans are at once 
threatened by this mass extinc tion event at 
the same time as they contrib ute to the 
accel er a tion of this extinc tion, and have 
done so since the earli est days of human 
migra tion ( Diamond 1989 ). Th e current 
era of intense anthro po genic climate 
change, along with the declar a tion of the 
Anthropocene, seems to have enabled a 
shift  in degree that has ulti mately gener-
ated a diﬀ er ence in kind. Extinction may 
have been as much a part of life as growth, 
decay, muta tion and prolif er a tion, but it 
may also be that extinc tion reaches a 
threshold and rate that gener ates a new 
dynamic between life and loss. ‘Mass 
extinc tion’ far exceeds the ‘back ground 
rate’ of the ebb and ﬂ ow of life’s creation 
and destruc tion but there are never the less 
diﬀ er ent ways one can mark the threshold 
between extinc tion as part of the dynam ics 
of life, and massive losses of species and 
biod iversity ( Wang 2003 ). 
 Extinction is as natural and inev it able 
as emer gence, but it may be that when 
extinc tion can be witnessed from within 
‘a’ life that this aspect of exist ence opens a 
new way of prob lem at iz ing the limits of 
think ing and what it might mean to mourn 
or save a form of life. Having emerged
EXTINCTION 
from previ ous mass extinc tions, humans 
are at once part of the ebb and ﬂ ow of life 
and non- life on earth, but are never the less 
the ﬁ rst beings to witness, mourn and 
artic u late extinc tion as an expli cit event. 
Elizabeth Kolbert provides a wonder ful 
gene a logy of the sense and milieu of 
extinc tion, chart ing the emer gence of the 
concept of species loss (prior to Darwin’s 
theory of evol u tion), and then the increas-
ing aware ness of the fragil ity of many 
species from the carrier pigeon to Panama’s 
golden frogs ( Kolbert 2014 ). Th is ‘simple’ 
and primary sense of extinc tion never the-
less already harbours polit ical tensions and 
contrary tend en cies. To say that humans 
are the ﬁ rst species to witness and contrib-
ute to extinc tion is to deﬁ ne humans  as a 
species , and to deploy species think ing. But 
who are these witness ing species- aware 
humans? Th e briefest glimpse of what has 
come to be known as post- apoca lyptic 
culture – from Cormac McCarthy’s  Th e 
Road  (2009) in liter at ure and the  Mad Max 
series in cinema, to the eﬄ  or es cence in 
every aspect of cultural output includ ing 
tele vi sion, music and gaming – evid ences 
that the exper i ence of extinc tion requires a 
certain aﬀ ect ive comport ment towards the 
world. Kolbert’s reﬂ ect ive journey is a 
model of mild- mannered cultur ally sens it-
ive respect. Her book expresses none of the 
narciss istic panic that accom pan ies the 
major ity of ‘end of the world’ narrat ives, 
which are predom in antly ‘end of the aﬄ  u-
ent world’ stories in which ‘man’ either 
becomes exposed to his fragil ity and saves 
the day ( World War Z ( 2013 ) , Th e Day the 
Earth Stood Still (2008) , Th e Day Aft er 
Tomorrow  (2004)); or, more recently, the 
end of man and life is ﬁ gured in terms of 
species- bifurc a tion, with some humans 
command eer ing and squan der ing the few 
remain ing resources while enslav ing the 
major ity of barely- living humans ( Lane-
McKinley 2015 ). Yet, even if Kolbert’s 
subtle gene a logy of the current exper i ence 
of extinc tion does not fetish ize a certain 
type of hyper- consum ing, risk- exposed 
and glob ally pred at ory late- human exist-
ence, it does operate with a sense of the 
bounds of species. 
 If, prior to modern ity, there were 
apoca lyptic narrat ives – with day- to-day 
exist ence being a constant exper i ence 
of expos ure, fragil ity and contin gency – 
the pre- modern sense of apoca lypse was 
also pre- human. To feel that one was living 
in end times, that all might be brought to 
nought, that a ﬂ ood or pesti lence might 
anni hil ate ‘everything’ was quite diﬀ er ent 
from the sense of there being a speciﬁ c 
kind of life – human think ing life, a life of 
 reason  – that might one day cease to be. 
 Extinction – as opposed to the sense that 
everything might end – relies upon a 
new sense of life that takes the form of 
distinct species (which, in turn, requires a 
modern, Western, tabu lat ing comport ment 
to the world). Th e thought of human 
extinc tion, in turn, entails the sense of ‘us’ 
as a species; while the prelim in ary mourn-
ing and panic that accom pan ies the 
thought of human extinc tion indic ates a 
fetish ized and supreme self- regard which is 
brought to the fore in the next under stand-
ing of human extinc tion that I explore 
below. For now, I would suggest that even 
the general notion of the ‘sixth mass extinc-
tion’, which ‘we’ are witness ing and perhaps 
feeling respons ible for, is groun ded in a 
panor amic view of life and human ity 
that is cultur ally and histor ic ally speciﬁ c. 
What has come to call itself ‘the human’ 
both requires and prob lem at izes species- 
think ing. Without the unify ing and divid-
ing logic of species it would be diﬃ   cult to 
think of global human ity – even if human-
ity most oft en deﬁ nes and regards itself as a 
species that has tran scen ded its ground. 
 Th is brings me to my second, ultra- 
human, sense of extinc tion. Th e very
possib il ity of extinc tion, along with a 
milieu in which there is an aware ness 
of possible cata strophe, intens i ﬁ es the 
modern sense that reason is bound to life, 
and that this singu lar life that is bound to a 
species 
may 
become 
extinct. 
Nick 
Bostrom’s work on exist en tial risks and the 
future of human ity not only outlines all the 
scen arios in which human intel li gence 
might be destroyed, and not only insists on 
the avoid ance of that cata strophe at all 
costs; he also allows for the possib il ity that 
what is valu able in the human species may 
survive biolo gical extinc tion ( Bostrom 
2002 ,  2013a ). One may have paro chial, 
senti mental and irra tional attach ments to 
life as we know it in its current human and 
fragile form, but a genu inely rational 
consid er a tion of life and its values would 
yield two imper at ives. Bostrom insists that 
upon reﬂ ec tion we should direct resources 
to avert ing exist en tial cata strophe, and that 
the true task of the future is that of secur-
ing the full tech no lo gical matur ity of 
human intel li gence. Th is may require some 
form other than human biolo gical life. 
Here his thought inter sects with other 
theor ists whose intense invest ment in 
human intel li gence is at once quite happy 
to contem plate a future in which intel li-
gence survives without humans, while also 
assum ing that nothing is more cata-
strophic than the loss of this deﬁ n it ive 
human capa city ( Kurzweil 2005 ). While 
Bostrom and thinkers like Ray Kurzweil 
might appear to be extreme outliers in 
a world that is attached to humans as a 
species rather than the human intel lect as a 
capa city that might outlive ‘us’, I would 
never the less suggest that their thought 
captures a tend ency of post- apoca lyptic 
extinc tion culture. It is almost as though 
the axiom of the twenty- ﬁ rst century is ‘I 
am threatened with non- being, there fore I 
must survive.’ James Lovelock, for example, 
has argued that we have reached a point 
where simply being more green will not 
suﬃ  ce; only more tech no logy will save us 
( Aitkenhead 2008 ). But who is this ‘we’ that 
has reached a tipping point and has 
declared ‘game over’? And who is this ‘we’ 
that declares that only the tech no logy that 
got ‘us’ into this mess will help us into the 
future? Th e threatened ‘we’ of tech no-
s cience ﬁ nds nothing more alarm ing than 
the possible end or non- being of tech no -
s cience, even as it acknow ledges that 
tech nos cience has been the motor of 
destruc tion. Th e Cartesian echo of ‘I face 
extinc tion there fore I must continue to be’ 
alerts us to the modern ity and hyper- 
human ism of the logics of extinc tion. It is 
only with a radical separ a tion of think ing 
as a substance, and not (as it was prior to 
Descartes) a poten ti al ity of ensouled life, 
that the possib il ity of the erasure of 
thought becomes think able. 
 Once humans think of them selves as a 
life- form, and then as a life- form with the 
excep tional capa city of think ing or reason, 
it becomes possible that the poten ti al ity 
for think ing could cease to be,  and that 
such a non- being of think ing is what must 
be averted at all costs and without ques-
tion. Nothing seems to justify our exist-
ence more – nothing seems to gener ate 
more of a feeling of the right to life – than 
the contem pla tion of human non- being, 
espe cially when that non- being is ﬁ gured 
as the absence of ration al ity. 
 Yet it is just this sense of enti tle ment 
and right to life that might be fruit fully 
vanquished in an inhuman future. It has 
become a common place in discuss ing 
post- apoca lyptic culture to say that it is 
easier to imagine the end of the world than 
it is to imagine the end of capit al ism. Th e 
problem with this cute phrase is that the 
imagined ‘end of the world’  is  an imagined 
end of aﬄ  u ent capit al ism. Th e ‘end of the 
world’ is one where humans wander 
aimlessly, just surviv ing, exposed to the
EXTINCTION 
suﬀ er ing from obesity, hyper- consump tion 
and stim u lus- over load. (One might concur 
here with McKenzie Wark ( 2015a ), who 
argues for a nature without ecology.) 
Th is post- apoca lyptic land scape is media- 
deprived, all of the archive left  in tatters, 
bereft  of shop ping, art galler ies or leisure 
indus tries. It is a world that one might 
think of as dysto pian and post- apoca lyptic 
 if what makes life worth living is reﬂ ect ive 
human reason and hyper- consump tion 
groun ded in a speciﬁ c archive. Th is world 
at the end of the world is perhaps, if one 
takes away the disdain ful ‘ﬁ rst- world’ 
framing, what a great deal of beings have 
known and respect fully lived  as life. If one 
thinks about extinc tion beyond species- 
fetish ism one might think of other modes 
of exist ence (that might survive what ‘we’ 
can only imagine as the end of the world) 
as the begin ning of new worlds. 
 See also Ahuman; Expulsions; Food; 
Survival; Necropolitics; Capitalocene and 
Chthulucene; Rewilding. 
 Claire Colebrook  Trevor Paglen,  Trinity 
Cube , 2015, irra di ated glass from the 
Fukushima Exclusion Zone, Trinitite, 
20 × 20 × 20 cm. COURTESY OF THE ARTIST AND 
DON’T FOLLOW THE WIND.
active- points, which insert femin ist ideas, 
designs, inform a tion and mean ings into 
the main stream commons. Feminicity is a 
spec u lat ive tool, creat ive of new signi ﬁ  ers 
of being and new data content with speciﬁ c 
femin ist- oriented goals. Th ere is an expli-
cit refer ence and critique of gender ing 
insti tu tions in actions of Feminicity. 
Active- points of Feminicity gener ate 
speciﬁ c ally femin ist- oriented dataﬁ c a tion, 
where the content injec ted into the system 
will demand resourcing from all areas of 
society and culture. Speculating on exist-
ing mater ial onto lo gies and gener at ing 
active- aﬀ ects, Feminicity works to manip-
u late the algorithmic ideo lo gies of capit al-
ist nihil istic and narciss istic beha viours, 
opening new real it ies. 
 Th e kinds of rela tion ships produced by 
inform a tion and commu nic a tion tech no-
lo gies and their inter ac tions with vernacu-
lar exper i ences and events enable dynamic 
cultural and polit ical condi tions and emer-
gent beha viours. Individuals, collect ives 
and cultures can be mobil ized or frac tured 
through such changes and the speeds of 
those changes. When the second- wave 
femin ist move ment plugged into the 
digital era of the 1990s, new femin ist 
ethical modes were gener ated through this 
inter ac tion between femin ism and digital 
tech no lo gies (cf.  Haraway 1991 ;  Hayles 
 F  
1999 ;  Wajcman 2004 ). Th is connec tion of 
second- wave femin ist and digital media 
high lighted the gender- bias of the notion 
of ‘neutral’ tech no lo gies, and the so- called 
‘net- neut ral ity’ of the digital market. Th e 
cultures created from this connec tion 
between inform a tion tech no lo gies and 
femin ism produced not just another 
language or series of stand points (cf. 
 Harding 1986 ,  2004 ;  Hayles 2002 ;  Plant 
1997 ), rather emer gent sets of femin ist 
prac tices were given form, chan ging deﬁ n-
i tions of norm at ive ‘natur al ized’ racial, 
sexual and social rela tions ( Braidotti 2013 : 
99), enabling a re- imagin ing of the mater-
ial actions and consequences of inform a-
tion, and the epoch of Digital Feminicity 
began. Historically, changes in know ledge 
forms are polit ic ally aligned, accord ing 
to the contexts through which they are 
produced, main tained and distrib uted. 
But in the global digital commons, the 
ques tion arises as to what is the extent of 
ethic ally posit ive change to the capit al ist 
‘norm at ive’ refer en tial frame works that 
actions of Feminicity achieve? 
 Active- points of Feminicity are found 
in the prac tices and activ it ies from the 
sciences, human it ies and creat ive arts that 
create, identify and analyse, through the 
emer gent beha viours gener ated between 
femin isms and the digital spheres. Th ese 
action- points use theor et ical and phys ical 
forms to mater i al ize their femin ist agency. 
Th ere are examples to be found in and 
across all discip lin ary ﬁ elds: the sciences, 
human it ies and the arts. Th e art collect ive
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FEMINICITY 
 VNS Matrix’s  Cyberfeminist Manifesto for 
the 21st Century  (1991) included multi- 
media art works that func tion as active- 
points that comic ally berate and agitate the 
patri archal algorithms of the new domains 
of tech no logy in the 1990s. Sadie Plant’s 
 Zeros and Ones: Digital Women and the 
New Technoculture  (1997) oﬀ ers more 
utopic forms of Feminicity than  VNS  
Matrix, and both of these active- points in 
their respect ive works celeb rate the joining 
of the digital with the femin ist as a posit ive 
reclam a tion of masculin ist discourses of 
tech no logy. 
 Donna Haraway’s text,  A Cyborg 
Manifesto (1985–1991), iden ti ﬁ es the 
epistem o lo gical signi ﬁ c ance of the shift  
into bio- tech no lo gical frame works for 
under stand ing the diﬀ er ent forms of polit-
ical real it ies that is produced in the digital 
merger of machine and sentient subject. 
Th e system of governance of the Industrial 
Revolution over its machine- man changed 
through the histor ical junc ture of the 
digital revolu tion. Signiﬁ cantly, Haraway 
describes this change in terms of the cybor-
gian personae as ‘not subject to Foucault’s 
biopol it ics’ but rather, it ‘stim u lates polit ics, 
a much more potent ﬁ eld of oper a tions’ 
( Haraway 1991 : 163). Haraway uses the 
concept of this cyborg (a neolo gism 
produced through polit ical consid er a tions 
of the ﬁ eld of cyber net ics) to express a 
‘disas sembled and reas sembled’ self, which 
femin ists must ‘code’ under the late capit al-
ist system of an ‘inform at ics of domin a tion’ 
( Haraway 1991 : 163). Haraway’s cyborg is a 
ﬂ ex ible active- point for Feminicity; stim u-
lat ing in a func tional way, and product ive 
of new femin ist forms for think ing and 
coding femin ist oper a tions, through the 
expans ive ness of its conﬁ g ur a tion which 
works to arouse new polit ical desires. As a 
spec u lat ive concept, Haraway’s cyborg 
proposes a number of utopic as well as 
prob able ideas for radical changes in think-
ing iden tity polit ics that defy racial or 
anatom ic ally given posi tions gener at ive of 
aﬃ  rm at ive modes of under stand ing life in 
terms of diﬀ er ent species, and their poten-
tial in terms of the exper i ence of a range of 
biopol it ical posi tions and the possib il it ies 
for new forms of collect ive communit ies. 
 Haraway’s cyborg as an exem plar of 
Feminicity enabled count less other active- 
points where the notion of a digital gender, 
and/or digital femin ism, to concep tu al ize, 
spec u late upon and produce new forms. 
Th ese are expressed under a range of names, 
includ ing 
Technofeminism 
( Wajcman 
2004 ), Cyberfeminism ( Cornelia Sollfrank 
1998 ) 
and 
Xenofeminism 
( Laboria 
Cuboniks collect ive 2015 ). Artist Juliana 
Huxtable’s perform ance  Th ere Are Certain 
Facts that Cannot Be Disputed (2015) frames 
the research ques tions of many prac ti tion ers 
of the ﬁ rst decades of Feminicity, where 
visual symbols still govern racial ized and 
gendered norm at ive beha viours. 
 Within a func tional digital envir on-
ment, new tools for expres sion and artic u la-
tion of femin ist posi tions are enabled. While 
global digital markets currently come under 
diﬀ er ent regu la tions and legis la tion (for 
example the  DSM (Digital Single Market) 
model adopted by the European Union in 
2016), common global inform at ics points 
enabled a relat ively free distri bu tion of 
active- points (the dissem in ated content of 
which may have consequences for the 
maker/user of the mater ial). Th e YouTube 
digital broad cast channel, launched in 2005, 
for example, gave the femin ist collect ive 
Pussy Riot the plat form by which it could 
glob ally distrib ute ‘A Punk Prayer’ (2012), a 
potent active- point of Feminicity, that 
redir ec ted the media commons atten tion to 
a range of breaches of human rights issues, 
made by norm at ive patri archal forms of 
reli gious and gender repress ive systems. 
Th e Twitter social media plat form (2006) 
enables a satur a tion of femin ist content,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
through simple use of a hashtag, restric ted 
char ac ter limit and images, employed as 
action- tools. Whether as systemic confes-
sional like #femin ist selﬁ e, or as a situ ated 
evid ence of femin ist activ ism # FEMEN ; 
#pussyr iot, a parody of patri archal values, 
such as #FeministsAreUgly, the hashtag of 
the post-Twitter digital commons works as 
a polit ical and ethical vector of Feminicity; 
polar iz ing opinion, but algorith mic ally 
raising the issues to the top of the inform a-
tion pile. Frequently the hashtag records not 
so much a narrat ive of situ ated polit ics, but 
rather oﬀ ers a femin ist tactical inter ven tion 
into construc ted genders. Given the terms 
of the current capit al ist market that treats 
people as living capital, the inform a tion that 
such active- points convey is oft en para dox-
ical, but never the less it contrib utes to 
the growth of self- organ iz ing, aﬃ  rm at ive 
femin ist ideas and onto lo gies. 
 Active- points of Feminicity are thus 
not just carri ers of ideas, they are creat ors 
and gener at ors of innov a tion in ﬁ elds 
that work for gender equal ity and the 
ethical treat ment of diﬀ er ences. Th e 
object- oriented coding of gendered beha-
viours, consump tion and non- sustain able 
prac tices in an inform a tional economy 
provides the focus of inter ven tion for 
femin ist active- points. Th rough tactics of 
satur a tion, spec u la tion, code addi tions 
(through  API s for example), redir ec tions, 
mis- direc tions, inser tion of errors, changes 
to capit al ist norm at ive beha viours, posit ive 
spec u lat ive content and biased perso nas, 
more femin ist content is being circu lated, 
and more anti- femin ist content is removed 
through methods of under- resourcing. 
Positive images of people made through 
the inven tion and imple ment a tion of legis-
la tion that is pro gender diversity and zero 
toler ance of viol ence and discrim in a tion 
against diﬀ er ence is the aim of ethical 
femin ists. Th e forms of insti tu tional 
subject consti tuted by its envir on ments 
that Foucault iden ti ﬁ es are no longer the 
only ways of being, as actions of Feminicity 
demon strate. Katherine Hayles refers to 
this change from the equa tional oper a tion 
of some thing (as in the perform at ive 
adher ence to given insti tu tional geomet-
ries of life) to the current state of the 
‘mater i al ist inform at ics’ of ‘mater ial, tech-
no lo gical, economic, and social struc tures 
that make the inform a tion age possible’ 
( Hayles 1993 : 148). 
 Generating more ethic ally focused 
gender content in the world’s global 
economy means creat ing new activ it ies 
that require new kinds of resourcing 
to enable their real iz a tion. Actions of 
Feminicity can be diﬀ er en ti ated by the 
terms, dura tion, speed and mediums of 
their agency of forms and concepts. Some 
func tion as spec u lat ive (in the utopic 
examples of applic a tions and outcomes of 
tech no logy; or Haraway’s altern at ive world 
propos als). Some action- points can be 
discerned through policy (where govern-
mental changes have enabled legis la tion), 
evid en tial (in the case of advocacy groups 
that work for human rights for all genders, 
educa tion equal ity, enhanced curricula 
with ethic ally respons ible know ledge), 
scientiﬁ c (action- aﬀ ects aft er new know-
ledge is applied and tested and which 
results in posit ive change), theor et ical 
(new forms of expres sion and or revi sion-
ist femin ist histor ies). Active- points can 
gener ate innov at ive tools, includ ing ethical 
femin ist- oriented codes, and new forms of 
femin ist commu nic a tion methods, coun ter-
ing destruct ive actions and redis trib ut ing 
capit al ist ideo lo gies, tack ling issues of 
gender and racially biased inequal it ies and 
gender and ethnic ally based violent actions 
that domin ate soci et ies. Active- points of 
Feminicity provide creat ive and spec u lat-
ive altern at ives for ethical models of living. 
In this they are useful as they provide 
analysis tools for a femin ist data struc ture
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FEMINIST POSTHUMANITIES 
of mater i al ist inform at ics, as well as 
contrib ut ing to forming a future that is not 
governed by a masculin ist hubris driven by 
viol ence and hatred, but which is instead 
product ive of a posit ive and creat ive 
embrace of all life forms. 
 See also Algorithmic Studies; Earth; 
Naturecultures; Post Internet; Technicity; 
Gaga Feminism. 
 Felicity Colman 
 FEMINIST POSTHUMANITIES  
 Cognisant of shift  ing terrains in the contem-
por ary human it ies, femin ist posthu man it ies 
engages with crit ical and creat ive pursuits 
that address chan ging rela tions between 
polit ical animals of a more- than- human 
kind, bodies, tech no lo gies and envir on-
ments, and it does so from inter dis cip lin ary 
and post- conven tional perspect ives ( Åsberg 
2008 ; Åsberg and Braidotti 2017). Feminist 
posthu man it ies 
may 
describe 
post- 
conven tional research that already thrives 
on the margins or outside the conven tional 
schol arly comfort zones. Under this heading 
or others, it has become clear that nothing 
remains evident or given about the human 
of the human it ies. 
 Th e human body may well today be 
regarded as a micro bi otic multi- species 
ecology in and of itself. Only 10 per cent of 
the tril lion cells that consti tute it are of the 
human- animal variety, while a motley 
major ity of other micro scopic organ isms 
domin ate our bodies. Even our genes are 
less than fully human: the human genome, 
hailed in the 2000s as our chro mo somal 
genetic make- up and the ‘recipe’ for human-
ity, surprised scient ists with its display of 
evol u tion ary co- consti tu tion of human ness 
with other species, count ing major it ies of 
viral, bacterial, fungi and other micro bi otic 
compan ions ( Haraway 2008 ). If crit ical 
thought aft er the Holocaust forced us to 
ques tion our own intra- species human ity, 
the human ques tion has not exactly dimin-
ished in rela tion ship to science, medi cine, 
tech no logy, the envir on ment and other 
organ isms. At the same time, human soci et-
ies have impacted Earth’s biosphere and 
climatic systems such that some scient ists 
propose naming a new geolo gical era, 
begin ning with indus tri al iz a tion, mass 
defor est a tion or the  US nuclear deton a tions 
(depend ing on what expert is asked), as the 
Anthropocene, the Age of Man. Th is Age of 
Man that we now inhabit follows upon the 
aeons of deep time of the Holocene. It 
seems we tried to make nature into our 
image, but with a less than pretty result. 
 However, it is beyond doubt today that 
we are as much in nature as nature is in us. 
It follows from this tenet that the clas sical 
objects of study for the human it ies – 
culture, and, of course, the human – are 
anything but given or self- evident. Humans 
today are, aft er all, more obvi ously than 
ever entangled in co- constitutive rela tion-
ships with nature and the envir on ment, 
with science and tech no logy, with vulner-
able embod i ment, and with other animals 
by which we live and die. Critical and creat-
ive forms of human it ies take such make- 
or-break entan gle ments into account, and 
do not take the ﬁ gure of Man as its taken- 
for-granted centrepiece. Rather, forms 
of posthu man it ies, or more- than-human 
human it ies, take recip rocal and condi tional 
rela tion ships by which we become human 
with ‘Earth others’ ( Plumwood 1993 ) as its 
start ing point. Feminist research, long 
critiquing the cent ral ity of the ﬁ gure of 
Man for its gender chau vin ism, stands as a 
case in point; a set of research approaches 
that focus on power rela tion ships that 
shape words and worlds. 
 Feminist 
posthu man it ies 
stand 
as 
one possible response to the posthu man
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
( Braidotti 2013 ), but they draw in eﬀ ect on a 
set of mean der ing alter- gene a lo gies in anti- 
colo nial cyborg studies ( Haraway 1991 ), 
science and liter at ure studies, queer theory, 
cultural studies ( Franklin, Lury and Stacey 
2000 ), 
situ ated 
know ledge 
prac tices 
( Haraway 1991 ), advanced sex- gender 
theor iz ing, power- know ledge and sexual 
diﬀ er ence theory ( Braidotti 1994 ). Some of 
these are, under diﬀ er ent head ings, quite 
long- stand ing 
schol arly 
conver sa tions; 
some are more recent. For instance, some of 
the long- stand ing femin ist theor iz a tions 
of sex and gender trace theor ies of 
 denat ur al iz a tion , such as Donna Haraway’s 
cyborg onto logy, Judith Butler’s dispelling 
of any hetero norm at ive found a tion of 
biolo gical sex, Stacy Alaimo’s post- natural 
eco- femin ism or Myra Hird’s insist ence 
on all organ isms’ inher ent, cellu lar trans-
sexu al ity. But such femin ist theor iz ing 
also traces the onto lo gical, bio- aﬃ  rm at ive 
or  renat ur al iz ing turn, exem pli ﬁ ed by 
authors such as Elisabeth Grosz, Lynda 
Birke, Elisabeth Wilson, Vicki Kirby and 
Karen Barad. 
 In fact, femin ist posthu man it ies is today 
but one response among many to the age- 
old femin ist ques tion of who gets to count 
as human within the author it at ive annals 
of the human it ies and sciences. Yet it is 
a multi- headed response deﬁ ned by its 
open- ended ness, by its inter-, trans- or 
post- discip lin ar ity, and by its insist ence 
on the bio- curious creativ ity of femin ist 
theory. Gender, like genus and gener a tion 
( Hemmings 2011 ,  van der Tuin 2015a ), may 
well in this setting be regarded as an engine 
of discov ery as much as a crit ical category 
of inter sec tional diﬀ er ence analysis.  
 Posthuman Humanities 
 Th e term posthu man has come to desig-
nate a very loosely related set of recent 
attempts to recon cep tu al ize the rela tion-
ship between the rapidly chan ging ﬁ eld of 
tech no logy and the condi tions of human 
embod i ment ( Hayles 1997 ). However, 
popular and schol arly notions of the 
‘posthu man’ oft en signify vastly diﬀ er ent 
things. Troublesome posthu man isms in 
popular circu la tion oft en share a belief 
in modern progress, in tech no logy as 
salva tion from bodily vulner ab il it ies, 
even from death. Uncritically celeb rat ing 
Enlightenment ideals of anthro po centric 
human ism, this ﬁ gur a tion of posthu man-
ism can even mani fest as a form of super- 
human ism, 
or ‘transhuman ism’. 
Th is 
transhuman ism works to tran scend and 
over come the body through mind (or 
belief in science) and thus complete the 
imagined mind–body split (as also seen in 
science ﬁ ction fantas ies of digit ally down-
load ing minds or cryo- preserving bodies). 
Such unwhole some post- femin ist and 
post- biolo gical under stand ings of post -
hu man embod i ment fail to consider the 
recal cit rant and connec ted nature of 
bodies and embod ied selfh ood as more 
than a bounded, cereb ral aﬀ air. Th us, in my 
view, they are incom pat ible with the motifs 
for doing femin ist posthu man it ies. 
 Feminist philo soph ers and schol ars of 
science studies and cultural studies have 
instead deployed the notion of the 
posthu man in order to break or other wise 
over come the ﬁ xed, dyadic and hier arch-
ical categor ies of nature and culture, or 
the human and the non- human, thereby 
enabling altern at ive analyses that explore 
the entan gle ments and mutual produc-
tions that result. For Karen Barad, ‘post -
hu man ism marks a refusal to take the 
distinc tion between “human” and “non  -
hu man” for granted, and to found analysis 
on this presum ably ﬁ xed and inher ent 
set of categor ies’ ( Barad 2007 : 32). For 
Katherine N. Hayles, the posthu man 
signals both a problem and a possib il ity:
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FEMINIST POSTHUMANITIES 
ground of being, my dream is a version of 
the posthu man that embraces the possi -
b il it ies 
of 
inform a tion 
tech no lo gies 
without being seduced by fantas ies of 
unlim ited 
power 
and 
disem bod ied 
immor tal ity, that recog nizes and cele -
b rates ﬁ nitude as a condi tion of human 
being, and that under stands human life is 
embed ded in a mater ial world of great 
complex ity, one on which we depend for 
our contin ued survival. 
 1999: 5 
 From early work on the cyborg ( Haraway 
1991 ) to more recent work on agen tial 
realism ( Barad 2003 ;  2007 ), the posthu-
man has proven to be product ive for an 
onto lo gical polit ics of femin ist and crit ical 
theory, as exhib ited by Rosi Braidotti 
( 2013 ). 
 Posthumanities as Embedded and 
Embodied Knowledges of Worlds- in- 
the- making  
 Posthumanities, a slightly diﬀ er ent yet 
related term, stands then as the oper a tion-
al iz a tion of such more- than-human schol-
ar ship ( Whatmore 2002 ,  2012 ;  Wolfe 
2010 ): posthu man it ies work recog nizes 
the role of the non- human for the human 
of the human it ies. Th e book series 
‘Posthumanities’, inaug ur ated and edited 
by cultural and animal studies scholar 
Cary Wolfe, deﬁ nes itself as situ ated at a 
cross roads. Instead of ‘repro du cing estab-
lished forms and methods of discip lin ary 
know ledge, posthu man ists confront how 
changes in society and culture require 
that schol ars rethink what they do – 
theor et ic ally, meth od o lo gic ally, and ethic-
ally’ ( Minnesota University Press 2017 ). 
Similarly, Donna Haraway ( 2008 ), who has 
no patience with the over- determ ined 
notion of ‘the posthu man’, never the less 
ﬁ nds the term ‘useful’ for ‘track ing schol arly 
conver sa tions’ on the chan ging rela tion-
ships between the human and non- human, 
culture and nature, tech no logy and the 
body, and Other and Self. 
 Th e preﬁ x ‘post-’ here does not signal 
any kind of end, but rather the inclu sion 
of the human it ies in a perhaps counter- 
intu it ive move ment away from the con -
ven tional comfort zones of human- centred 
research at large. It ques tions and troubles 
human excep tion al ism ( Tsing 2011 ) and 
other norm at ive forms of chau vin isms. As 
such, posthu man it ies, like the nomadic 
trans vers al ity of femin ist analyses ( Braidotti 
1994 ), may well trans late and mutate into 
several bodies of thought across discip lines, 
while bene ﬁ t ing from, and contrib ut ing to, 
the analyt ical approaches developed within 
the human it ies. From situ ated know ledge 
( Haraway 1988 ), to embod ied and embed-
ded start ing points, to the multi valent 
corpor eal it ies ( Grosz 1994 ) that make or 
break the world, these approaches make for 
rich analyses. 
 Strange encoun ters are key to this 
endeav our, as is a will ing ness to expose 
oneself to alien a tion. Nothing remains 
natural or given, yet all is worldly and 
proces sual. Feminist posthu man it ies can 
contrib ute an oppos i tional conscious-
 ness – a double vision on renat ur al iz a tion 
and denat ur al iz a tion – as well as post- 
conven tional community- build ing (with 
scient ists, envir on ment al ists and animal 
and body activ ists). It provides crit ical and 
creat ive re- tool ings of the human sciences 
from their start ing points in the embod ied 
and embed ded world li ness of know ledge. 
Respectful conver sa tions across borders, 
processes of ‘rooting and shift  ing’ ( Yuval-
Davis 2012 ) are what might ensue at such 
cross roads. Feminist posthu man it ies is but 
one possible name for such encoun ters, as
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
and natur al ism, in the trans dis cip lin ary 
border lands of the human it ies today. 
 See also Postdisciplinarity; Posthuman 
Critical Th eory; Neo/New Materialism; 
Gaga Feminism. 
 Cecilia Åsberg 
 FOOD  
 Technological improve ments in food 
science open one route to address the 
possib il it ies of ‘posthu man’ eating. Th e 
science ﬁ ction cliché of the meal in a pill 
oﬀ ers the hope of nutri tion without the 
bestial messi ness of foraging on and then 
excret ing great masses of stuﬀ , and without 
equally bestial gust at ory delights;  Adam 
Roberts’ 2011 novel  By Light Alone 
imagines humans spliced with a photo syn-
thetic gene, freeing eating from its reli ance 
on the exploit a tions of land or labour: 
economic collapse follows, while oral 
eating becomes a pleas ure, even a perver-
sion, for the remain ing wealthy elite; and 
labor at ory- produced ﬂ esh – a real possi -
b il ity in the next several decades – might 
allow for carni vor ous meals liber ated both 
of the cruelty of slaughter, whether indus-
tri al ized or ‘humane’, and of the asso ci ated 
steak house fantas ies of mascu line mastery 
over life and death ( Ferdman 2015 ). 
 All of this suggests, however, that a 
truly posthu man turn in food must await 
disrupt ive tech no lo gical inter ven tions into 
the prac tices of eating and food produc-
tion. Meanwhile, the human remains, that 
species that habitu ally believes itself to be 
the one life meant prop erly to be just an 
end rather than means. A more thor ough 
posthu man ism should there fore concen-
trate not on the eating itself, not on trying 
to surmount our animal depend ence on 
other bodies, but rather on resist ing 
cultural prac tices of human suprem acy. 
Th e posthu man eater need not await some 
tech no lo gical tomor row, as that post -
hu man possib il ity has always been here, 
wherever humans, partic u larly domin ant 
humans, have recog nized them selves as 
food too. 
 In a passage lauded by ecocrit ics for 
describ ing a ‘transhuman ethic’ ( Schalow 
2006 : 112), Martin Heidegger’s 1946 ‘Letter 
on “Humanism” ’ declares that ‘Man is not 
the lord of beings. Man is the shep herd of 
being’ (1998: 260). But to be a shep herd is 
to be singu lar and heroic among a crowd, 
the fortu nate, oft en witless recip i ents of 
our protec tion; and to be a literal shep herd 
means not just protect ing a ﬂ ock, but living 
oﬀ  wool and, at last, mutton. Heidegger’s 
meta phor, even if it inspires char it able 
atten tion to suﬀ er ing herb i vores, has not 
gone far enough. ‘Man is the univer sal 
para site,’ observes Michel Serres ( [1980] 
1982 : 24); ‘all the foot prints point towards 
the lion’s den’ (ibid.: 26). Th ey lead this way, 
however, only within the fantasy of human 
mastery, in which we are only the eaters, 
and never the meal. 
 By emend ing Heidegger’s maxim to read 
‘man is the fodder of beings’, we recog nize 
that however much we believe ourselves to 
exist within the clear ing we make for being, 
we are also mater ial things, and there fore 
subject to the uses of others. Th e authen tic 
(post)human condi tion must recog nize our 
ines cap able mater ial pres ence amid other 
mater ial things. Increasing atten tion to the 
human micro bi ome – the mites that live 
exclus ively on humans, the intest inal 
bacteria neces sar ily for our diges tion 
( Bennett 2010 : 112;  Yong 2015 ) – bears 
witness to a growing aware ness that every 
indi vidual human is a micro cos mic home-
land or pasture for swarms of other life, 
indiﬀ er ent to our paro chial illu sion of 
solitude or self- mastery.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FOOD 
 Some of the most thor ough concep tu al-
iz a tions of the mater i al ity of human bodies 
appear long before these modern micro-
scopic insights, in the death poetry of 
medi eval Christian Europe, which revelled 
in the decom pos i tion, and hence the edi -
b il ity, of human bodies. A work like the 
ﬁ ft eenth- century ‘Disputation between the 
Body and Worms’, for example, pictures a 
crowd of worms insist ing to a complain ing 
corpse that she has always been food for 
others: bedbugs, lice, and now, in the grave, 
maggots. It is not acci dental that this poem, 
preserved in a docu ment produced by an 
unusu ally severe male monas tery, makes 
its belea guered corpse a once beau ti ful, 
wealthy woman. Its celib ate male readers 
would be led to recog nize their own edib il-
ity, while simul tan eously delight ing in the 
humi li ation of a ﬂ eshy vanity that they 
disdained as partic u larly femin ine. And 
they them selves imagined that they would 
be resur rec ted into perfec ted, unchan ging 
bodies, freed of the neces sity of eating or 
the humi li ations of excre tion. Left  behind 
is the pullu lat ing body of this woman, like 
so many other disdained bodies, treated as 
food. 
 Th is poem is evid ence that only a few 
humans have tended to be granted the 
full protec tions of human mastery. Th e 
Christians of late medi eval England told 
stories about the descent of Jews from pigs, 
one of the few domestic animals raised 
only for meat; crusade ﬁ ctions imagined 
captured Muslim soldiers butchered and 
fed either to each other or to their captors; 
eight eenth- century accounts of mari time 
canni bal ism attest that white sailors were 
rarely the ﬁ rst sacri ﬁ ced to stave oﬀ  their 
ship mates’ star va tion; and what oft en 
distin guishes the heroes of post- collapse 
ﬁ ction like  Th e Road or  World War Z from 
the swarms of eaters and eaten is their 
being, with few excep tions, well- armed, 
able- bodied white men. 
 Posthuman prac tices must counter the 
idea of the ‘uneaten eater’ by requir ing a 
recog ni tion of the shared imman ence of at 
least our bodies and their enabling, uneven 
inter de pend en cies. A posthu man ethics of 
food would replace the concept of the ‘food 
pyramid’ with a ‘food chain’ or, better yet, a 
food web. Th is would not aim to render us 
as ethic ally irrel ev ant as many of us tend to 
assume our food to be, but would rather 
dispel the inter woven illu sions of inno cent 
eating, mater ial inde pend ence and personal 
tran scend ence. Patterns of consump tion 
are never one- to-one (as with a chain), as 
anything that continu ally relies on the 
consump tion of a host of others, and is 
subject in turn to other, uncount able 
appet ites. Nor can eating, enacted as it is 
amid the continual ﬂ ux of beings, ever be a 
closed loop. Eating is open- ended. 
 Several contem por ary artistic prac tices 
centre on foster ing this recog ni tion. Jae 
Rhim Lee’s  Inﬁ nity Burial Suit  is crocheted 
with a rhizo matic pattern infused with 
mush room spores, that when combined 
with mineral and fungal reagents both 
helps the body decom pose and captures 
the envir on mental toxins that we ingest 
while alive (‘Th e Inﬁ nity Burial’). Elaine 
Tin Nyo is currently engaged in a ‘Little 
Piggy’ project: she is raising ﬁ ve piglets, 
whose lives will end in an abat toir, 
whereupon Tin Nyo will render them into 
sausage. She has paired this project with 
one she plans to realize decades from now, 
when she meets her own (natural) death, 
by having herself also trans formed into 
sausage ( Moy 2014 ). A still more chal len-
ging posthu man food prac tice, neither 
await ing death nor relying on directly 
killing animals, is recor ded in Alex Branch’s 
2011 video  Nothing Left  to Take Away . 
Branch stands on a parking lot hillock of 
snow, amid a swarm of seagulls, feeding 
them bread, until, empty handed, she 
collapses to let the gulls peck frantic ally
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
and angrily at the food that remains: this is 
her helmet, which Branch has fash ioned 
from bread. Branch has not evened out the 
distinc tion between herself and the gulls: 
she is the artist, this is her work, and her 
gift  to them is also a cultural prac tice for 
herself; she has not returned the world to a 
presumptive ‘balance’: aft er all, the gulls 
ﬁ ght with one another, and bread is the 
paradig matic food of settled agri cul ture 
and its inequit ies; and to shoot the ﬁ lm, she 
had ﬁ rst to accus tom the gulls to her pres-
ence: this is there fore a prac tice of mutual 
domest ic a tion, which requires taking a 
body from one home and train ing it for 
another. Th is prac tice is one of nego ti ation, 
depend ency, shared expos ure and danger. 
 Food is the substance par excel lence of 
nostal gic attach ment to the mater nal or 
even grand- mater nal, the home land, the 
‘pure’, ‘authen tic’ and ‘hand- craft ed’. In 
these forms, food func tions as a mater i al-
ized form of fantas ies of inno cence and 
belong ing and the irre spons ib il ity of being 
taken care of. Posthuman mater i al isms, in 
their frequent dedic a tion to disrupt ing 
notions of onto lo gical ﬁ xed ness, some-
times forget that anything that exists, 
whatever its entan gle ments with others, 
still has or is had by that one thing that 
cannot be shared, its own end, whether we 
call this end a disrup tion, a dispersal or a 
death. A posthu man aware ness of eating 
recog nizes it as a prac tice of bodily and 
hence onto lo gical poros ity; it knows that 
eating is never inno cent, always a death 
prac tice, always an unequal exchange 
between mortal bodies, always a nego ti-
ation between bodies more or less ﬁ tted for 
each other, and that being a compan ion – 
as with Branch and the gulls – can some-
times require oﬀ er ing up what one believes 
to be one’s own body to another. 
 See also Animal; Art; Ecomaterialism; 
Ethereal Scent; Feminist Posthumanities; 
Multispecies; 
Postmedieval; 
Trans-
corporeality; Urbanibalism. 
 Karl Steel 
 FORESTS  
 Forests occupy a singu lar role in the 
history of Western thought, ﬁ gur ing as 
the territ ory – mater ial and imagined; 
concrete, symbolic and meta phys ical – 
that lies outside the borders of the social 
contract, the space of the civic and the 
realms of reason. Forests demarc ate a 
threshold – as much envir on mental as 
polit ical and legal, epistemic and onto lo-
gical – against which civil iz a tion is deﬁ ned, 
being considered both its primeval pre- 
condi tion and its anti thesis or nega tion. In 
the Western imagin a tion, the space of the 
social par excel lence – and by exten sion of 
culture, polit ics, law and history – is the 
city, and the city stands to the forest in a 
rela tion of funda mental oppos i tion. 1 
 Th e myth of the found a tion of Rome 
tells that the city was erected in a clear ing 
carved in a dense forest. Th e burning and 
cutting of trees was the ﬁ rst and decis ive 
inscrip tion of history in the land scape, the 
inaug ural act in the construc tion of human 
insti tu tions. At the margins of the city and 
its rural states, the undo mestic ated forest 
drew the borders of the  res publica , setting 
the limits of Rome’s juris dic tion beyond 
which land was  res nullius or  terra nullius , 
‘belong ing to no one’, ‘nobody’s land’. At the 
edges of empire, where the forest loomed 
beyond the horizon, there existed the state-
less, lawless, unruly territ ory of barbar ian 
tribes. 
 Within the social and spatial order of 
medi eval feud al ism and Christianity in 
Europe, with its networks of dispersed, 
walled city- enclaves, forests were considered
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FORESTS 
by reason, forests were seen as land scapes 
opposed to the human and the social by 
virtue of the scientiﬁ c objec ti ﬁ c a tion of 
nature. In the seven teenth and eight eenth 
centur ies, at a moment when defor est a tion 
reached vast exten sions of the European 
contin ent, forests started to be considered 
under util it arian perspect ives, framed as a 
natural resource to be ration ally domest ic-
ated and subjec ted by human know ledge 
and power. Whereas the geomet ric urban 
designs of planned towns repres en ted the 
exem plary spatial mani fest a tion of the 
exer cise of reason – ‘those well- ordered 
towns that an engin eer lays out on a vacant 
plane as it suits his fancy’, as Descartes 
wrote ( Discourse on Method , Part I, 1637) 
as the ‘outside’. Wooded lands conﬁ gured a 
dark, wild zone beyond the city’s enclos ure 
that was inhab ited by all sorts of outcasts 
and outlaws: fugit ives and perse cuted, mad 
and lepers, the fallen and the beasts. In 
theo lo gical terms, forests were the realm 
of anarchy, shadows and the inhuman, 
the fron tier space of the ordained social- 
reli gious world of the city. Modernity, 
whether in the human ist tradi tion of the 
Renascence or in the Enlightened post-
Cartesian mani fest a tion, perpetu ated this 
lineage of thought but at the same time intro-
 duced a radic ally diﬀ er ent paradigm. As 
the human species took centre stage in the 
Western imagin a tion and the place of myth-
 o logy and theist philo sophy was occu pied 
 Anthropogenic sculp ted land scapes of raised fi elds punc tu ate the fl ooded trop ical savan nahs 
of the north ern Amazon basin. Nearly invis ible from the ground, these large clusters of cultiv a tion 
(c. 1,000 years  BP ) were uncovered through the infra- red ‘photo graphic- archae olo gies’ produced by 
archae olo gist Stéphen Rostain in the 1980s.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
– forests repres en ted the space of random-
ness, arbit rar i ness and irra tion al ity. 
 During colo nial modern ity the image of 
the forest as a natural, pre- civil iz a tional 
space was recast anew by the concept of 
‘state of nature’ in polit ical and moral philo-
sophy. Th e battle ﬁ eld of Hobbes’ war of all 
against all was a densely fores ted land scape, 
more precisely the trop ical forests of the 
New World as they were imagined by early 
colo nial accounts, where ‘savages . . . have 
no govern ment at all and live at this day in 
that brutish manner’ ( Leviathan  – Chapter 
 XIII : ‘Of the Natural Condition of Mankind 
as Concerning Th eir Felicity and Misery’). 
Rousseau’s noble savage also dwelled in a 
primeval land scape covered by ‘immense 
woods’, but idyllic and peace ful, ‘laying 
himself down to sleep at the foot of the 
same tree that aﬀ orded him his meal’ 
( Discourse on the Origin and Basis of 
Inequality Among Men ). By the nine teenth 
century, this imagin ary was entangled with 
the orient al ist/occi dent al ist geograph ies of 
colo ni al ism and modern scientiﬁ c theor ies 
of social evol u tion and racial inferi or ity. 
Th rough the hands of white explorers, colo-
nial admin is trat ors, natur al ists and ethno-
graph ers, forests – espe cially  trop ical forests 
– became the quint es sen tial repres ent a tion 
of the natural realm, the Earth’s remain ing 
pristine envir on ments where society was in 
its infancy and humans remained in a 
prim it ive, animal- like condi tion. 
 Amazonia, the world’s greatest trop ical 
forest, became one of the most import ant 
symbolic and epistemic spaces through 
which the reas on ing behind this image of 
nature and society, and the power struc tures 
it sustained, were forged and legit im ized. In 
the tradi tion of Western imagin a tion, the 
nature of Amazonia is as much luxuri ous as 
inhos pit able, refract ory to civil iz a tion and 
nearly unmod i ﬁ ed by social designs. One of 
the central argu ments support ing this view 
was the appar ent inex ist ence of indi gen ous 
urban complexes in the forest land scape, 
both in the ancient past, as archae olo gical 
evid ence, and in the modern present, 
as long- lasting archi tec tural struc tures. 
Constrained by the insur mount able forces 
of the trop ical forest envir on ment, so the 
theory went, ‘prim it ive’ soci et ies did not 
develop the tech no lo gical means to alter the 
land in any mean ing ful way. 
 Recent archae olo gical ﬁ nd ings are radic-
ally trans form ing this image of Amazonia 
and completely recon ﬁ g ur ing the ways by 
which both the nature and the history of the 
forest are inter preted. Archaeologists and 
ethno bot an ists are reveal ing the exist ence of 
large and complex pre-Colombian civil iz a-
tions spread through out the Amazon basin 
which 
employed 
advanced 
land scape 
manage ment tech niques. Th e evid ence tells 
us that not only the modes of inhab it a tion 
of native peoples leave a clear ‘archi tec tural 
trace’ in the land scape, but also that they 
play a remark able func tion in shaping the 
veget at ive asso ci ations and species contents 
of the forest. Th e past and the present of the 
most biod i verse territ ory on Earth is as rich 
in nature as in culture: the forests of 
Amazonia are to a great extent an ‘urban 
herit age’ of indi gen ous soci et ies. 
 Th is new archae olo gical, forensic image 
of Amazonia unsettles the colo nial 
perspect ive of Western imagin a tion, to 
whom the forest repres en ted the anti thesis 
of the space of civil iz a tion, a resource of 
radical alter ity against which the city was 
deﬁ ned. Th e radical other that the forest 
presents is not a completely natural land-
scape, the abso lute nega tion to the cultur-
ally satur ated civic- polit ical space of the 
urban. It is an alto gether diﬀ er ent form of 
urban ity itself that escapes the spatial and 
epistemic geomet ries of colo nial modern 
reason and imagin ar ies. Instead of seeing 
the forest as an envir on ment lacking the 
city, it is the very concept of the city that 
has to be widened and trans formed to
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FORESTS 
Forests 1. Copyright Stéphen Rostain
Forests 2. Copyright Stéphen Rostain
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
incor por ate the construc ted, polit ical 
nature of the forest. From that perspect ive, 
the origins of the  polis – the space of the 
polit ical – is not located on the onto lo gical 
cleav age between city and forest, nature 
and culture, but in the consti tu tion of an 
expan ded polit ical arena across these 
borders. Th e city’s rela tion ﬁ gure- ground is 
subver ted. Instead of the empty canvas 
upon which history was drawn, nature 
emerges in the fore ground as the picture 
itself, the inten tional creation of soci et ies 
and not merely their support. Th e found a-
tions of the city do not rest on the act of 
clear ing the forest, but on the prac tice of 
its cultiv a tion. Another image of the city 
is rendered visible, one that initially we 
might ﬁ nd hard to recog nize because for 
too long we have been conﬁ ned within 
the epistemic and imagin ary walls of the 
Western city. 
 Many soci et ies indi gen ous to Amazonia 
do not only recog nize this urban nature of 
the forest, as for example by identi fy ing 
areas of dense ‘natural’ forests as anthro po-
genic land scapes, or by attrib ut ing cultural 
values to elements such as streams and 
trees, and thus codi fy ing the natural envir-
on ment in an analog ous form to the ways 
Western soci et ies treat build ings and 
monu ments. Th ey also extend the bound ar-
ies of this forest- polis beyond the human. 
Forests and rivers are popu lated by what the 
Sarayaku people call  llaktas – ‘villages’ and 
‘towns’. In contrast to Western cosmo logy, 
where the social is restric ted to the domain 
of the human species, in Amerindian 
thought the space between humans and 
non- humans, peoples and nature, is from 
the outset a social ized space. 
 ‘What we call the envir on ment is for 
them a society of soci et ies, an inter na-
Forests 3. Copyright Stéphen Rostain
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FOUR ELEMENTS 
tional arena, a cosmo pol iteia,’ philo sopher 
Debora Danowski and anthro po lo gist 
Eduardo Viveiros de Castro write (2014). 
Th is concep tion of the forest as a cosmo-
pol iteia implies that every being that lives 
in the forest – trees, jaguars and peoples – 
are city- dwell ers, that is, they are ‘citizens’ 
within an enlarged polit ical space to whom 
rights should be attrib uted. Th e neces sary 
recon ﬁ g ur a tion of the social towards a 
more hori zontal and less destruct ive rela-
tion al ity between humans and nature 
passes through the recon cep tu al iz a tion of 
the polis as forest, requir ing a radical shift  
in perspect ive and an exer cise in decol on-
iz a tion of thought and gaze. Th e nature of 
nature is social, and there fore polit ical. In 
the context of the post- climate-change 
world order, this forest- polis calls for the 
consti tu tion of an univer sal ist, multi- 
species social contract beyond the human. 
 See also Geomythologies; Postglacial; 
General Ecology; Green/Environmental 
Humanities; Rewilding. 
 Note  
 1. Th e brief ‘archae ology’ of the role of 
forests in Western thought presen ted here 
is drawn from Robert Pogue Harrison, 
 Forests: Th e Shadow of Civilization 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1992).  
 Paulo Tavares 
 Images by archae olo gist 
Stéphen Rostain 
 FOUR ELEMENTS  
 Th e ancient meta phys ical diagram of the 
four basic roots or elements, earth–air–
ﬁ re–water, is closely asso ci ated with the 
frag ments of Empedocles, as well as the 
explic a tions of Aristotle. A diagram is a 
dynamic and product ive device that leads 
thought to new places and may even 
assist in the construc tion of a new reality. 
Th e diagram’s creativ ity is ﬁ ltered by 
constraints. It works, it forces things 
together; but not without some lines to 
guide its unfurl ing. Th e diagram in addi-
tion does not project the idea that the 
elements are natural; they may be arti ﬁ  cial 
or a mixture of both. Th e diagram pilots a 
forward- looking traject ory in the form of 
an exper i ment with the new funda mental 
elements of our time. 
 Diagramming the four elements util izes 
the prin cipal align ments of ancient thought: 
Anaximenes’  AIR ; Aristotle’s  EARTH ; 
Heraclitus’  FIRE ; Th ales’  WATER , and 
the basic oppos i tions between hot/cold 
and wet/dry. In terms of contem por ary 
elemental theory, I draw upon philo sopher 
Reza Negarestani ( 2008 ), who oﬀ ers an 
analysis of the geo- mythic found a tion of 
the Middle East as a ‘dust plateau’ in the 
form of dust particles and ﬂ uxes and how 
they mix accord ing to a revised version of 
the diagram. Negarestani’s original redraw-
ing of the diagram expresses a traject ory 
that is inﬂ u enced by the combin a tion of 
three elements with various kinds of ques-
tion able wetnesses. Th e ancient desire of 
the dry for the wet, to be rehyd rated and 
settled, is to render dusty air, earth and ﬁ re, 
and to connect these with mois tur iz ing 
altern at ives to water; for example, oil. 
 New cosmic dynam ics are also invest ig-
ated through ﬂ am mable waters, perverse 
wetnesses that permit lakes and rivers to 
burst into ﬂ ames. Th e key example is that 
methane makes the tap water supply ﬂ am-
mable as a likely result of leaks or gas 
migra tion from hydraulic frac tur ing. Such 
threats to ground wa ter integ rity, exacer-
bated by frack ing ﬂ uids, forge a burn able, 
explos ive wetness that bubbles in the water 
and ﬂ ows around it. According to the rules 
of direct trans form a tion discovered by
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Aristotle, water cannot be directly trans-
formed into ﬁ re; the rule govern ing direct 
trans form a tion requires adja cency around 
the triangle. As Fire and Water are not 
adja cent, but opposed, they lack a so- called 
common quality. Hence, an indir ect trans-
form a tion may take place by means of the 
intro duc tion of a linking element, namely 
Air, which in this case is methane, an 
odour less and colour less gas, which is also 
combust ible and commonly used as a fuel. 
 A number of  NGO s have dissem in ated 
the phrase ‘blood diamonds’ within a 
growing complex of contested miner als. 
Proﬁ ts from diamond mining in Africa, 
speciﬁ c ally Angola, Congo and Sierra Leone, 
have funded weapons, armies and civil wars. 
International certi ﬁ c a tion regimes have 
been created to prevent blood diamonds 
from enter ing the global diamond market, 
and every legit im ate diamond is said to be 
trace able to its place of origin. But this was 
precisely the problem that the supply of 
blood itself faced in the 1980s and early 
impact of  HIV / AIDS on the haemo phil iac 
community. Recently new tech no lo gies for 
screen ing, with greater haemovi gil ance, 
have been intro duced, and a move to target-
ing donors who are low- risk, volun tary and 
unpaid is under way. Blood can be tracked 
from donor to patient. Just like the move-
ment of ethical diamonds through the 
supply chain. Not all such ﬂ ows – blood or 
conﬂ ict miner als – enjoy this level of surveil-
lance. Control over mines in some coun tries 
remains highly ﬂ uid, includ ing the situ ation 
with coltan quar ry ing on the Congo/
Rwanda border. Coltan is the short form for 
a mineral called Columbite–Tantalite, which 
contains niobium and tant alum used in 
capa cit ors for high- tech devices like mobile 
phones and elec tronic circuitry in general. 
Th e struggle for control of the mine on 
the Congo/Rwanda border between the 
Congolese Army and a rebel militia of 
displaced Rwanda mili tia men, as well as the 
inter cep tion of raw mater i als in nearby 
rebel- controlled villages, illus trates the shift -
ing ground within and beyond borders. 
 Th e ques tion that philo sopher Peter 
Sloterdijk poses is whether and under which 
condi tions a basic element like air can itself 
become ‘the war theatre’: a weapon and a 
battle ﬁ eld (2009b). Atmoterror in the form 
of a ‘dark meteor o logy’ consist ing of lethal 
clouds and deadly precip it a tion developed 
origin ally on the gas fronts of the First 
World War that neces sit ated a combin a tion 
of envir on mental and design conscious ness. 
To make the open air lethal is to make it 
unbreath able within a quasi- contained 
theatre, accord ing to the balance between 
factors such as diﬀ u sion, wind predic tion, 
air pres sure and humid ity. Th e ground 
campaign chem ical attack gives way aft er 
the First World War to the aero- chem ical 
war in Morocco (Rif War, 1922–7), and to 
the atom bombs dropped on Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. As a condi tion of exist ence, the 
atmo sphere support ing collect ive life worlds 
is erased by pois on ing. 
 Before Anaximenes air was murky, 
foggy and dark (perhaps not fully the fog 
of war but a darker shade of mist) until it 
was distilled and clari ﬁ ed in a cosmo genic 
distil la tion- uniﬁ c a tion. Th e prin ciples of 
rarefac tion or thin ning (ﬁ re) and conden -
s a tion (wind–cloud–water–earth) informed 
Anaximenes’ theory of air. Unable to 
dissip ate the long- stand ing mist of war 
that lingers in it, air is again darkened by 
atmot er ror, air war, gas attack – chlor ine, 
phos gene, mustard gas – and the long- 
term leth al ity of radio act ive particles 
emitted by nuclear weapons. Th e darker 
the skies the more intense the conﬂ ict. 
Even pollu tion – like the heavy smog that 
engulfs Beijing on many days – or the 
threat of airborne viruses like  SARS can 
bring out the  HEPA ﬁ ltered breath ing
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
FOUR ELEMENTS 
masks, a reminder of the gas masks of the 
First World War. 
 Based on the analyses presen ted here it 
is possible to repop u late the diagram with 
new funda mental elements:  EARTH : dust; 
 WATER : blood;  AIR : lethal fogs;  FIRE : 
ﬂ am mables. 
Wrapped 
around 
these 
elements is the plan et ary phylum, a great 
tellurian cable bunch with its own 
products:  EARTH : elec tron ics;  WATER : 
liquid it ies like water bottled in plastic, 
which throws forward diagram matic 
intens it ies in the explo sion of plastic 
debris;  AIR : gases (green house); and 
 FIRE : smoul der ing car tyres, slashed rain-
forests and seasonal wild ﬁ res in the great 
north ern forests. However, as we have seen, 
the new elements combine both in exist ing 
directly – blood mixed with dust in the 
extrac tion of conﬂ ict miner als and oil 
ﬁ elds, or methane, a ﬂ am mable unnat ur-
ally mingled with the water supply, and 
which contrib utes to the green house gas 
eﬀ ect – and by means of espe cially commu-
nic at ive matters, like micro scopic frag-
ments of plastics that perfuse the oceans 
and get into the food chain, and consti tute 
ﬁ ne dusts that aﬀ ect respir a tion, settling 
among the fogs, gases and lethal clouds. 
Today, condensed air is a toxic dust of 
frayed oil- based mater i als. Th e example of 
blood as a general liquid of exchange 
extends beyond the human to the moun-
tain goril las butchered for bush meat to 
feed the armies and labour ers engaged in 
‘freel ance’ mining oper a tions. Th is is 
neither an envir on mental nor an aesthet ics 
of the elements, but an unruly diagram of 
abom in able 
combin a tions 
and 
post- 
natural forces and substances. 
 See also Anthropocene; Earth; Geo-
mythologies; Terrestrial. 
 Gary Genosko
but will change accord ing to the game; 
wild also has meant barbaric, savage or 
that which the civil ized opposes. It refers 
oft en to a so- called state of nature, whatever 
that may be, and has recently been used to 
refer to the prac tice of going oﬀ  the grid or 
behav ing in a chaotic or anarchic manner. 
 Wild, in a modern sense, has been used 
to signify that which lies outside of civil iz a-
tion or modern ity. It has a racial ized valence 
and a sense of anachron ism. It is a tricky 
word to use but it is a concept that we cannot 
live without if we are to combat the conven-
tional modes of rule that have synched 
social norms to economic prac tices and 
have created a world order where every 
form of disturb ance is quickly folded back 
into quiet; every ripple is quickly smoothed 
over; every instance of erup tion has been 
tamped down and turned into new evid ence 
of the right ness of the status quo. 
 For my project, ‘the wild’ is not a place, 
person or prac tice; it is a poten tial in the 
sense that José E. Muñoz describes the 
queer ness of poten ti al ity: ‘Queerness is 
essen tially about the rejec tion of a here 
and now and an insist ence on poten ti al ity 
or concrete possib il ity for another world’ 
( Muñoz 2009 : 1). Th e wild is not what 
limns the present, what lies outside of the 
bounded here and now, it is some thing that 
we already conjure from within the here 
and now – we constantly call it into being. 
Wildness does not exist separ ately from 
our desire to break loose from a set of 
constraints or a determ ined under stand-
ing of what is appro pri ate, good and right. 
 GAGA FEMINISM  
 My book  Gaga Feminism: Sex, Gender and 
the End of Normal ( Halberstam 2012 ) has 
made the claim that the ‘exist ing condi-
tions’ under which the build ing blocks of 
human iden tity were imagined and cemen-
ted in the last century – what we call 
gender, sex, race and class – have changed 
so radic ally that new life can be glimpsed 
ahead. Our task is not to shape this new life 
into iden ti ﬁ  able and comfort ing forms, not 
to ‘know’ this ‘newness’ in advance, but 
rather, as Nietzsche suggests, to impose 
upon the categor ical chaos and crisis that 
surrounds us only ‘as much regu lar ity and 
form as our prac tical needs require’ 
( Nietzsche 1968 : 278). In new work, I build 
upon ideas from  Gaga Feminism and begin 
to develop a theory of queer anarch ism 
from a new compan ion project titled  Th e 
Wild , in order to weave a story about emer-
gent and posthu man forms of life through 
the glimpses we catch of it in popular 
culture and subcul tural produc tion. 
 Th e wild as a concept has lost its 
meaning in our age of post- civil iz a tion 
devel op ment, post- indus trial produc tion 
and post- iden tity being. As a word,  wild 
comes from old or middle English and 
refers to undo mestic ated modes of life, 
disorderly beha viour, the lack of moral 
restraint, excess in all kinds of forms, the 
erratic, the untamed, the savage. When 
refer ring to nature, the wild tends to mean 
unaltered by human contact: in card 
games, a ‘wild card’ lacks an intrinsic value 
 G
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GAGA FEMINISM 
My use of this word, a word laden with 
meaning, satur ated with sense drawn from 
colo nial and ecolo gical contexts, repres-
ents an attempt to stretch our crit ical 
vocab u lar ies in diﬀ er ent direc tions – away, 
for example, from the used- up languages 
of diﬀ er ence, alter ity, subver sion and 
resist ance and towards languages of unpre-
dict ab il ity, break down, disorder and shift -
ing forms of signi ﬁ c a tion. 
 In  Gaga Feminism , I track the action of 
‘going gaga’ as some thing that Lady Gaga 
chan nels but that is not partic u lar to her. 
Instead, I show how Lady Gaga’s global 
visib il ity hides a much longer history of 
wild and oft en punk female perform ances. 
Th e name Gaga, supposedly taken from 
the Queen song ‘Radio Ga Ga’, signi ﬁ es the 
creat ive mayhem that has spread through 
our sex gender systems and Lady Gaga 
herself occu pies several sites of radical 
ambi val ence and ambi gu ity and embod ies 
these shift s in the meaning of desire. For 
example, when rumours ﬂ ew around the 
inter net about Lady Gaga being inter-
sexed, she refused to deny the rumours 
about her own genital ambi gu ity in a 
phobic way. Gaga has said instead in an 
inter view with Barbara Walters: ‘I portray 
myself in a very andro gyn ous way and I 
love andro gyny.’ 1 Like David Bowie, Lady 
Gaga cruises on her appeal to male and 
female fans, and like Grace Jones, she 
alters the meaning of femin ine icon icity 
through refus ing to operate within the 
rules of popular consump tion that would 
freeze her through complex processes of 
fetish iz a tion. 
 Th e ambi gu ity that surrounds and even 
deﬁ nes Lady Gaga – genital, musical, 
aesthetic – allows her to both ques tion and 
revel in spec tac u lar forms of femin in ity. It 
also signi ﬁ es as a vivid example of posthu-
man modes of inhab it ing the body. In a 
post- femin ist age when young women 
both beneﬁ t from and simul tan eously 
deny leaps that have been engin eered by 
femin ism, we should explore care fully the 
new idioms of glamour and femin in ity as 
they appear within the perform ance- scape 
of stars like Lady Gaga. Like Poly Styrene, 
Grace Jones and Pauline Black before her, 
Lady Gaga creates alter egos, she syncs pop 
and punk sounds and she mixes dance 
stut ters into sonic hiccups to create a spas-
modic femin in ity that lurches and jerks 
into action. She also confuses the bound ar-
ies between internal and external, both 
high light ing the ways in which girls are 
forced to see them selves always as ‘image’ 
and contest ing that image by revel ling in a 
radical, Warholesque super ﬁ  ci al ity. Going 
gaga is not simply being Gaga, it is a 
journey to the edge of sense – Grace Jones 
goes gaga in her cover version of Joy 
Division’s ‘She’s Lost Control’ and Poly 
Styrene went gaga on ‘Oh Bondage Up 
Yours!’ While mascu line versions of going 
gaga take on heroic propor tions in rock 
history (guitar smash ing, strip ping on 
stage, crowd surﬁ ng), femin ine ecstatic 
perform ance is read quickly as sexual 
excess, ward robe malfunc tion or psycho lo-
gical break down. In Lady Gaga, however, 
femin ine perform at ive excess ﬁ nds a new 
perform ance horizon and hovers between 
madness, mayhem and the dark side. 
 While many readers of  Gaga Feminism 
read the book as a kind of homage to Lady 
Gaga herself, the ﬁ gure of Lady Gaga was 
repres ent at ive rather than authorial – in 
other words, her partic u lar synchron iz a-
tion of perform ance, sensa tion al ism, hyper 
and hypo femin in it ies, aﬀ ect, styl iz a tion 
and anim ated ness falls within the new and 
shift  ing bound ar ies of iden tity and embod-
i ment within what we call posthu man ism. 
I was not, there fore, trying to track who 
Lady Gaga was and what her perform at ive 
legacy might be so much as account for the 
partic u lar shape within which popular ity 
and newness fuse.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
GENERAL ECOLOGY*
 Posthumanism names a conﬁ g ur a tion 
of ﬂ esh, matrix, drugs and pleas ure, a 
matrix that has also been named the ‘phar-
ma co por na graphic’ by Paul Preciado 
( 2013 ); it frames the various under stand-
ings of self, body and other ness that make 
up and undo iden tity in an era of fast and 
hot cultures, envir on mental ruin and the 
disin teg ra tion of the social.  Gaga Feminism 
proposed that we have not paid close 
enough atten tion to the morph ing of sex 
and gender proto cols within the last two 
decades and it provides a quick account of 
these shift s and changes in rela tion to 
land mark 
shift s 
like 
the 
embrace 
of gay marriage, the new visib il ity of the 
trans gender body and the move away 
from the medic al iz a tion of iden tity and 
towards its medi at iz a tion. Arguing that we 
are in a state of almost constant ﬂ ux,  Gaga 
Feminism argues for an intens i ﬁ c a tion of 
confu sion and chaos and the embrace 
of social, polit ical and repres ent a tional 
anarchy on the way to the next incarn a tion 
of the queer, the strange and the beau ti ful. 
 See 
also 
Feminist 
Posthumanities; 
Postdisciplinarity; Xenofeminism.  
 Note 
 1. See online inter view for  ABC News, 22 
January 2010, http://abcnews.go.com/
Entertainment/video/lady- gaga-love- 
andro gyny–9640579 [accessed 14 April 
2017]. 
 Jack Halberstam 
 GENERAL ECOLOGY*  
 Our age is char ac ter ized by the rise of a 
new histor ical semantics: the rise of 
ecology. Th ere hardly seems to be an area 
that cannot be considered the object of an 
ecology, hardly any area not open to an 
ecolo gical refor mu la tion ( Hörl 2013a ). 
Th is prolif er a tion of the ecolo gical is 
accom pan ied by a strik ing shift  in the 
meaning of ‘ecology’. Th e concept is 
increas ingly denat ur al ized: whereas previ-
ously it was charged, polit ic ally and 
semantic ally, with nature, it now prac tic-
ally calls for an ‘ecology without nature’ 
( Morton 2010b ) and begins to occupy 
even ﬁ elds that are deﬁ n it ively unnat ural 
( Fuller 2005 ;  Goddard and Parikka 2011 ). 
In losing this dimen sion, the concept also 
sheds a constrict ive set of immun o pol it ical 
connota tions along with its ties to dogmas 
of prox im ity, imme di acy, the unscathed, 
the proper, the house ( Derrida 1998 ; 
 Neyrat 2008 ), to dogmas, in short, that 
have haunted and reter rit ori al ized the 
concept of ecology (due to its origin in the 
Greek  oikos and as its prob lem atic logo-
centric herit age) ever since its genesis in 
the nine teenth century. Th is histor ical- 
semantic reori ent a tion begins to distance 
ecology from what Bataille called restric-
ted economy ( Bataille 1988 ) and to gener-
al ize it. Ecology as such becomes a central 
cipher of the great trans form a tion in the 
polit ics of concepts and theory that marks 
our posthu man chal lenge: the general 
ecolo giz a tion of think ing and of theory. 
 Yet what exactly is the concep tual core 
of this move ment of ecolo giz a tion? What 
set of prob lems do general ecolo giz a tion 
and the emer gence of a new ecolo gical 
image of thought – for that is what we are 
dealing with – react to? 
 First of all, the gener al iz a tion of ecology 
and the form a tion of the new ecolo gical 
paradigm, which cut across all modes of 
exist ence and domains of being, refer to a 
twofold devel op ment in the polit ics of 
diﬀ er ence that is of partic u lar signi ﬁ c ance 
in the current situ ation. Th ey express a 
trans valu ation of the rela tion ship between 
tech nics and nature and, at the same time,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GENERAL ECOLOGY* 
between tech nics and sense. Th ey thereby 
take into account the great break in the 
history of ration al ity and sense imple men-
ted by our entry into the tech no lo gical 
condi tion ( Hörl 2015 ). Finally – and this is 
what the move ment at issue here aims for 
– general ecolo giz a tion is encoded in terms 
of power. It is exacted by the new appar atus 
of 
capture 
that 
is 
Environmenality 
( Foucault 2008 ;  Massumi 2009 ), in which 
power is envir on ment al ized by media tech-
no lo gies that are based on distri bu tion 
infra struc tures and begins to operate 
ecolo gic ally. 1 Yet at the same time, the 
gener al iz a tion of ecology in its most radical 
forms, which funda ment ally recon cep tu al-
ize think ing and theory, also repres ents a 
critique of this new appar atus of capture. 
 While from the perspect ive of the 
history of concepts and discourses the 
concept of ecology has primar ily and for 
the longest time desig nated the other side 
of tech nics and of mind, it has now begun 
to switch sides within the nature/tech nics 
divide. It undoes the sutures that have 
bound it to nature. And it is doing so, 
crucially, in paral lel with or perhaps even 
as a result of a funda mental unset tling of 
this very diﬀ er ence, which, in the twen ti eth 
century, is no longer compre hen ded in the 
time- honoured Aristotelian way from the 
side of nature. Th e supple ment a tion of 
nature by tech nics no longer seems to be 
inscribed in nature, and its guar an tee of 
purposes no longer seems to be circum-
scribed and regu lated by nature. In its 
entirety, the instru mental logic of means 
and purpose that tech no logy was to 
embody, the long- lived tele olo gical ration-
al ity that seemed to mani fest the sense of 
tech nics, indeed, the entire western order 
of tele ology – let’s call it ontotele ology – 
has been shaken to the core, unsettled 
precisely by the evol u tion of tech nics itself. 
Th e becom ing- tech no lo gical of tech nics 
under way in the total cyber net i ciz a tion of 
all modes of exist ence and domains of 
being in the twen ti eth century, the dawn 
of a new age of tech ni city marked on all 
levels, from the micro- to the macro level, 
by the emer gence of machinic assemblages 
( Simondon 1989 ) in which tech no logy 
becomes 
the 
previ ously 
unthink able 
milieu of all being: they radic ally demon-
strate that there are no pre- given purposes 
of any kind. Technology even turns out to 
be the abso lute agent of this absence 
( Nancy 2003 ,  2013 ;  Hörl 2013b ). Nature, 
too, now begins to be subject to tech nics. 
What emerges is an essen tial tech ni city of 
nature, a tech no lo gical or, more precisely, 
a cyber netic state of nature ( Moscovici 
1968 ). Geologists even observe the genesis 
of a tech no sphere in addi tion to the exist-
ing ones ranging from the litho- to the 
atmo sphere ( Haﬀ  2014 ). In the entry into 
the tech no lo gical condi tion, in which this 
great histor ical muta tion is concen trated, 
the concept of ecology is plur al ized and 
dissem in ated; it is deﬁ ned and consol i-
dated in the concept of gener al ized ecolo-
gies ( Guattari 2008 ,  2013 ;  Gibson 1986 ; 
 Bateson 1972 ); it soon traverses all 
domains of exist ence under its spell; it 
ﬁ nally trans forms into tech noeco logy. It 
becomes the guiding concept of the deter-
rit ori al iz a tion of the rela tion ship between 
nature and tech nics that char ac ter izes the 
present age. 
 Th ereby technoecological ration al ity 
succeeds on instru mental ration al ity. A 
concep tion of rela tions as radic ally origin-
ary and constitutive of relata as such 
replaces a concep tion in which rela tion al ity 
was thought to mani fest itself most purely 
in rela tions of means and purpose and 
of causes and eﬀ ects, one in which rela tions 
were thought as deriv at ive, second ary, 
some times even minor ﬁ gures over against 
the entit ies that preceded them, a con -
cep tion, in other words, in which the 
sense of rela tion al ity was schem at ized in a
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
GENERAL ECOLOGY*
clas sical instru mental way. Th is radical- 
rela tional onto- epistem o lo gical renewal 
under the auspices of a general ecology 
crit ical of all anthro po centrism – para-
digmat ic ally under stood as machinic 
collab or a tion of human and nonhu man 
agents and forces, as great cooper a tion, 
primary entan gle ment, origin ary being- 
with, inev it able parti cip a tion, hetero- and 
symbio gen esis, as sympoiesis of living and 
non- living entit ies and forces – consti tutes 
the core of the fascin a tion with non- 
modern ity so central for under stand ing 
our posthu man situ ation ( Braidotti 2013 ). 
 At the same time and intrins ic ally 
linked to this renewal there is a change in 
the inner economy of the diﬀ er ence 
between tech nics and sense. All the way 
to the twen ti eth century, the tradi tional 
polit ics of sense, culmin at ing in Husserl’s 
discus sion of the total destruc tion of sense 
by math em at ical- tech no lo gical mobil iz a-
tion, was organ ized not just by the juxta-
pos i tion of sense and tech nics alone. Th e 
aspect of tech nics has always been subor-
din ate to the aspect of sense and to its 
guard ian, the sense- giving subject. Every 
shift  of emphasis toward tech nics ulti-
mately threatened a collapse of sense. Such 
an assess ment, however, holds true only in 
the context of a very speciﬁ c dispos i tion in 
the history of sense, albeit one of funda-
mental signi ﬁ c ance for the dogmatic 
philo soph ical polit ics of sense: it mani fests 
the culture of sense of meaning and repres-
ent a tion, its speciﬁ c tech no lo gical- medial 
condi tion and its most import ant support, 
the alpha bet ized reading- writing-subject 
of the tran scend ental tradi tion. In contrast, 
we have for quite some time been living a 
shift  in the culture of sense provoked by 
the entry into the tech no lo gical condi tion, 
a shift  from signi fy ing sense to tech noeco-
lo gical sense, in which the essen tial medi-
al ity and tech ni city of sense comes to the 
fore. Th is, however, trans forms the concept 
of sense as a whole: there is a tech no lo gical 
shift  ing of the sense of sense itself. In line 
with the tech no lo gical destruc tion of 
western ontotele ology, the mode of given-
ness of sense as such changes; there is no 
sense given or to be given, no sense sedi-
men ted or to be resti tuted. Against this 
back ground, the cult of sign and meaning, 
the prim or di al ity of human language, 
and the despot ism of the signi ﬁ er, which 
char ac ter ized the tradi tional logo centric 
culture of sense and were mostly borne by 
a non- tech nical, speak ing subject that gave 
meaning, turn out to be pretech no lo gical 
illu sions. In the age of a cyber net i ciz a tion, 
compu ter iz a tion 
and 
algorithmiz a tion 
char ac ter istic of the tech no lo gical condi-
tion, they are replaced by diﬀ er ent, non- 
linguistic, asig ni fy ing semi ot ics (soft  ware 
and program ming languages, algorithms, 
math em at ical equa tions, diagrams, stock- 
market indices, etc.), which combine with 
aﬀ ect ive forces to form a new machino-
centric regime of sense, produ cing eﬀ ects 
of subjectiv a tion that are as much char ac-
ter istic of the cyber cap it al ist consti tu tion 
as they are poten tially capable of under-
min ing it ( Guattari 1995 ,  2012 ;  Lazzarato 
2014 ). 
 Ultimately, however, this signi ﬁ c ant 
trans valu ation in the history of sense and 
ration al ity, the cross roads at which general 
ecology appears, is not a mere event of tech-
no lo gical evol u tion but the expres sion of a 
trans form a tion in the history of power: the 
tech no lo gical evol u tion that co de termines 
these trans valu ations devel ops along a 
history of machines that can be deciphered 
as a history of control ( Beniger 1986 ) and 
has led to the current recon ﬁ g ur a tion of the 
appar atus of capture. What has developed 
from out of the process of cyber netic iz a tion 
since the late nine teenth century and espe-
cially since 1950, and ﬁ nally from out of the 
break through of computers emig rat ing into 
the envir on ment, the wide spread imple-
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GEO-HYDRO-SOLAR-BIO-TECHNO-POLITICS 
envir on ments ( Parisi 2009 ;  Hansen 2013 ; 
 Munster 2013 ;  Easterling 2014 ;  Gabrys 
2014 ), is a radic ally distrib uted and distrib-
ut ing, one might say envir on mental culture 
of control. Interconnection with the envir-
on ment as a new func tion of media and 
eﬀ ects 
of 
Environmentalization 
thus 
determ ine 
twenty- ﬁ rst-century 
media 
( Hansen 2015 ). Th ey lead to the compre-
hens ive imple ment a tion of the cyber netic 
hypo thesis of univer sal control lab il ity and 
the regu lat ory ideal that comes with it, to the 
mesh of a new tech no logy of power that has 
begun to operate ecolo gic ally or at least 
envir on ment al izes itself. In this process, 
even what used simply to be called ‘envir on-
ment’ is made envir on mental thanks to 
medi a t ech no lo gical 
infra struc tures 
of 
control. Environmentality, which is imple-
men ted ﬁ rst and fore most by media tech no-
lo gies, is the contem por ary form of govern-
ment al ity. 
 Th is, precisely, is the ﬂ ip side of the pro-
gram matic emer gence of envir on ment al ity 
and its correl ate, the primacy of rela tions in 
light 
of 
tech noeco lo gical 
ration al ity. 
Th e radical envir on mental distri bu tion of 
agency by envir on mental media tech no lo-
gies not only renders envir on ment al ity 
visible and prior it izes it like never before. In 
Environmentality as a form of govern-
ment al ity, envir on ment al ity as a problem 
becomes mani fest in the ﬁ rst place. Its 
guiding problem is the regis tra tion and 
control, the manage ment and modu la tion 
of beha viour, aﬀ ects, rela tions, intens it ies 
and forces by means of envir on mental 
(media) tech no lo gies. Th e contem por ary 
appar atus of capture and the diagram of 
power can be grasped only in ecolo gical 
registers. To a certain extent, even the emer-
gence of rela tion al ity itself is inscribed in 
this histor ical devel op ment of control: this 
new form of power is based on the regis tra-
tion, capit al iz a tion and exploit a tion of rela-
tions of all kinds, on an economy and 
math em at ics of rela tions ( Rouvroy 2013 ; 
 Zuboﬀ  2015 ). Th e cyber cap it al ist organ iz a-
tion of the web of life ( Moore 2015 ), which 
artic u lates the cyber netic hypo thesis with 
the capita locene, is rela tional. 
 General ecology is the name of a new 
image of thought. While the devel op ments 
in the history of ration al ity, sense and 
control that culmin ate in the turn towards 
Environmentality exact the general eco-
logization of think ing and theory, this 
ecolo giz a tion at the same time crit ic ally 
works through this turn: it outlines (or at 
least has the poten tial to outline) an onto-
ep istem o lo gical coun ter know ledge of the 
ecolo gical whose begin nings are clearly 
mani fest today ( Ingold 2000 ). 
 See also Algorithm; Capitalocene and 
Chthulucene; 
Computational 
Turn; 
Ecosophy; Technicity.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
GEO-HYDRO-SOLAR-BIO-TECHNO-POLITICS
multiple actual (or ‘diﬀ er en ci ated’) forms 
of human life from irre du cibly diﬀ er en ti-
ated ‘multi pli cit ies’, that is, networks of 
natural, social, polit ical and physiolo gical 
processes. Th is analysis does not deny 
subjectiv ity, but embeds it in processes 
above, below and along side the subject. 
Here we see ‘bodies politic’ that imbric ate 
the social and the somatic: the repro duc-
tion of social systems requires produ cing 
certain types of ‘somatic bodies politic’ 
(those whose aﬀ ect ive- cognit ive patterns 
and trig gers ﬁ t the func tional needs of 
the system) while those social systems or 
‘civic bodies politic’ are them selves bodily 
in the sense of direct ing mater ial ﬂ ows 
( Protevi 2009 ). 
 Using the ancient Athenian Empire as a 
case study of geo- hydro-solar- bio-techno- 
polit ics, we can look above the subject to 
the geopol it ics of circuits of food qua 
captured solar energy, below to polit ical 
physiology qua entrain ment- provoked 
solid ar ity, and along side to bio- tech nical 
assemblages such as the phalanx and the 
trireme ( Protevi 2013 ). Th e choice of this 
case study is useful in disab us ing us of the 
present ist notion that only now are we 
enter ing a posthu man age. Th e geo- hydro-
solar- bio-techno multi pli city behind the 
morpho gen esis of imbric ated civic and 
somatic bodies politic in the ancient 
Mediterranean world includes geolo gical 
factors such as ground slopes and surface 
fric tion; biolo gical factors such as type 
and strength of local ﬂ ora and fauna; and 
hydro lo gical factors such as river currents, 
chan nels and wave strengths. In addi tion, 
it also includes social- tech nical factors 
such as the speed capa city of warfare 
assemblages: the phalanx as man–spear–
shield assemblage; the chariot as horse– 
men (driver and ﬁ ghter)– bow assemblage; 
and, the water borne assemblages of rower- 
powered warships and sailing- power 
merchant ships. 
 It may seem odd at ﬁ rst, but from the 
geo- hydro-solar- bio-techno- polit ics 
perspect ive we can claim olive oil as a key 
factor in the genesis of Athenian demo-
cracy. Olive oil is a storage form of solar 
energy burned for light in lamps and 
burned for energy in human bodies. One 
of the tipping points in the demo crat iz a-
tion process in Athens occurs when Solon 
forbids debt slavery and debt bondage 
( Raaﬂ aub, Ober and Wallace 2007 : 59;  Ste 
Croix 1981 : 137, 282) as well as all agri cul-
tural exports except that of olive oil. Th is 
last provi sion stabil izes the middle class 
of small farmers who were threatened 
by aris to cratic domin ance by provid ing 
them with a ready cash crop ( Milne 1945 ; 
 Molina 1998 ). Th is stabil iz a tion of a mass 
olive oil export market also creates 
demand for work by urban artis ans who 
produce jars for olive oil and manu fac-
tured goods for export (also arms for 
hoplites 
to 
fore stall 
aris to cratic 
re- 
conquest). A growing urban popu la tion 
needs grain import a tion, however, and 
protect ing the import routes needs a naval 
force. In turn, what we can call the ‘milit ary 
egal it ari an ism’ thesis retains its force, 
and claims that a depend ence on a naval 
force pushes the regime toward urban 
demo cracy, that is, to expand ing the polit-
ical base beyond that of the hoplites, for 
rowers are drawn from the ranks of urban 
masses unable to aﬀ ord hoplite gear 
( Raaﬂ aub et  al. 2007 : 119–36;  Gabrielsen 
2001 ). 
 Now 
demo cratic 
rowing 
in 
the 
Athenian navy (leaving aside the ques tion 
of seaborne marine troops) was relat ively 
low intens ity, at least compared to the 
hand- to-hand ﬁ ght ing depic ted in Homer, 
and the phalanx clashes of the clas sical age. 
(Actually, we should note that ‘hand- to-
hand’ is a misnomer, for shield and sword/
spear is itself quite a bit less intense than 
just one- on-one with hands.) Th us for
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GEO-HYDRO-SOLAR-BIO-TECHNO-POLITICS 
rowers there is less neces sity for the high- 
intens ity train ing needed for noble single 
combat. Phalanx train ing was inter me di ate 
between aris to cratic single combat and 
naval rowing; it is less intense than single 
combat, because of team work; that is, 
emer gence. In the phalanx, you stand by 
your comrades rather than surge ahead as 
did the Homeric heroes for whom staying 
in line would be cowardly. 
 Th e discrep ancy between phalanx 
soldierly courage and Homeric warrior 
courage is an excel lent example of the need 
to over come essen tial ism: you will never 
come up with a set of neces sary and suﬃ  -
cient condi tions to deﬁ ne ‘courage’, so it is 
much better to invest ig ate the morpho gen-
esis of warrior and soldierly bodies politic: 
how are the warrior and the soldier dif-
ferent actu al iz a tions of the virtual multi -
pli city linking polit ical physiology and 
geo- hydro-solar- polit ics? Th e prac tice of 
march ing and stand ing together is the 
key to the civic and somatic bodies politic 
expressed by the phalanx. As we will see 
in a moment, William McNeill’s  Keeping 
Together in Time allows us to account 
for this bonding in terms of collect ive 
reson at ing move ment provok ing the 
entrain ment of asub ject ive physiolo gical 
processes support ing emotional attach-
ment ( McNeill 1995 : 117). 
 But before we go below the subject ive 
level 
to 
entrain ment 
and 
polit ical 
physiology, we should note its comple-
ment in the supra- subject ive mater i al ist 
explan a tion of Athenian foreign policy 
by the noted Marxist histor ian, G. E. M. 
de Ste Croix. In   Th e Origins of the 
Peloponnesian War   (1972) and again in 
 Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World 
(1981), Ste Croix points out that the geo- 
polit ical key to the trans ition from 
Athenian demo cracy at home to the 
‘Athenian Empire’ aft er the Persian Wars is 
the threshold of human energy produc-
tion from grain inges tion. Ste Croix uses 
this to under cut ideo lo gical explan a tions 
of Athenian foreign policy: ‘I have . . . 
explained why Athens was driven by her 
unique situ ation, as an importer of corn 
on an alto gether excep tional scale, toward 
a policy of “naval imper i al ism”, in order to 
secure her supply routes’ (1981: 293). Th e 
singu lar it ies in the Athenian actu al iz a tion 
of the geo- hydro-bio- polit ical multi pli city 
are what get us out of ideo lo gical condem-
na tions of a supposed Athenian ‘lust for 
power.’ As Ste Croix points out, rower- 
powered warships had a much shorter 
range than sail- driven merchant ships, 
which are able to capture solar energy in 
form of wind power – itself gener ated 
from a multi pli city of temper at ure diﬀ er-
en tials of land mass/sea/water currents 
produ cing wind currents (1972: 47–9; see 
also  Gomme 1933 ). So the Athenian 
demo crats needed a network of friendly 
regimes whose ports could provide food 
and rest for the rowers of their triremes. 
Th at is, to use our termin o logy, to replen-
ish the biolo gical solar energy conver sion 
units of the triremes qua ‘man- driven 
torpedo[es]’ 
( Gabrielsen 
2001 : 
73). 
Bringing the geo- hydro-solar dimen sions 
of the multi pli city together with bio- 
tech nical and more tradi tion ally socio- 
polit ical dimen sions, a recent schol arly 
article puts it this way: ‘the concept of 
 thalas sokra tia [sea- power] implies intense 
naval activ ity, primar ily in order to defend 
exist ing bases and to acquire new ones, and 
intense naval activ ity, in its turn, requires 
command over enorm ous mater ial and 
ﬁ nan cial resources’ ( Gabrielsen 2001 : 74). 
Adopting this view point allows us to 
under stand the supra- subject ive and anti- 
ideo lo gical mater i al ism of a key passage 
from Ste Croix: 
  Athens’ whole way of life was involved; 
and what is so oft en denounced, as if it
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
were sheer greed and a lust for domin a-
tion on her part, by modern schol ars 
whose anti pathy to Athens is sharpened 
by promo tion of demo cratic regimes in 
states under her control or inﬂ u ence,  was 
in reality an almost inev it able consequence 
of that way of life. 
 1981: 293, emphasis added 
 But we should not be content with only 
going above the subject ive; we should go 
below it as well. McNeill’s reading of the 
polit ical consequences of entrain ment- 
provoked milit ary solid ar ity takes us below 
the subject, comple ment ing Ste Croix’s 
supra- subject ive geo- mater i al ism. McNeill 
writes, ‘the Athenian ﬂ eet developed 
muscu lar bonding among a larger propor-
tion of the total popu la tion than ever 
fought in Sparta’s phalanx’ ( McNeill 1995 : 
117). Furthermore, ‘feel ings aroused by 
moving together in unison under girded 
the ideals of freedom and equal ity under 
the law . . . Th e muscu lar basis of such 
senti ments also explains why the rights of 
free and equal citizens were limited to the 
milit ar ily active segment of the popu la tion’ 
(ibid.:118). 
 In this entry we have shown a version 
of posthu man ism by going above, below 
and along side the subject. Above to Ste 
Croix’s supra- subject ive geopol it ics, below 
to McNeill’s sub- subject ive entrain ment- 
provoked emotional solid ar ity, and along-
side to Gabrielsen’s adjunct- subject ive 
bio- tech nical assemblage (the trireme 
as ‘man- driven torpedo’). We have thus 
sketched the dimen sions of a geo- 
hydro-solar- bio-techno- polit ical multi pli-
city expressed in the naval demo cratic 
empire of ancient Athens. 
 See also Body Politic; Capitalocene and 
Chthulucene; Geopolitics; Medianatures; 
Necropolitics. 
 John Protevi 
 GEOMYTHOLOGIES  
 With the tradi tional methods of know-
ledge acquis i tion, the natural sciences on 
the one side and the human it ies on the 
other, mankind has reached a limit. Th e 
indi vis ible concat en a tion of indus trial 
meta bol ism, climate change, soil erosion 
and the extinc tion of species requires a 
new approach to the world that is governed 
by mater ial inter con nec tions from the 
accu mu la tion of plastic islands in the 
ocean to the partic u lar ity of a speck of 
dust on its way from the Sahara to the 
Brazilian rain forest. A new sense of 
amazement at the wonder of Planet Earth 
is required: what can we do, how can we 
know and to what extent are the two 
connec ted? With what means, methods 
and senses can we encounter the world of 
our own creation? 
 In their essay ﬁ lm  Medium Earth 
( 2013 ), Th e Otolith Group explore the 
earth quake- endangered 
geology 
of 
California as well as the infra struc tural 
uncon scious of plan et ary capit al ism. 
Th rough pictures that appeal to the senses 
and the voice of a medium whose body is 
sens it ive to seismic occur rences, the ﬁ lm 
listens to California’s deserts, trans lates 
the writing of stones and decodes the 
calli graphy of the earth’s crevices.  Who 
Does the Earth Th ink It Is ? ( 2014 ) consists 
of redac ted and scanned selec tions from 
the unoﬃ   cial collec tion of unso li cited 
earth quake predic tions sent by members 
of the public to the United States 
Geological Survey Pasadena Field Oﬃ  ce at 
California 
Institute 
of 
Technology, 
Pasadena, Southern California, between 
1993 and 2007. 
 See also  Anthropocene; Art; Capitalocene 
and Chthulucene; Earth; Forests. 
 Th e Otolith Group
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GEOMYTHOLOGIES 
 The Otolith Group,  Who Does the Earth Think It Is? (detail),  2014 . COURTESY OF THE ARTISTS.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 The Otolith Group,  Who Does the Earth Think It Is? (detail),  2014 . COURTESY OF THE ARTISTS.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GEOPOLITICS 
Kant and Hegel had a nascent and occa-
sion ally expli cit geopol it ics, its current 
usage (perhaps now outmoded) stems 
from traject or ies that can be gleaned from 
early Modern colo ni al ism to the Cold War. 
Kant’s inter ven tion into this fray comes 
with his ‘Essay on Perpetual Peace’. Th is 
treat ise contains an empir ical problem, 
perhaps even an irresolv able paradox. 
Every human, Kant claims, has an equal 
right to a place on the earth’s surface 
because we are constrained and circum-
scribed by its spher ical shape. If the earth 
contained inﬁ n ite space, then such claims 
could not be made or even be an issue. But 
by the very act of assert ing one’s natural 
right to this space, Kant also argues, one 
becomes an oﬀ ence simply by being 
another’s neigh bour. Kant’s essay on 
perpetual peace becomes instead an essay 
on perpetual agonism as the unin ten ded 
result of striv ing for perpetual peace. 
 The Otolith Group,  Who Does the Earth Think It Is? (detail),  2014 . COURTESY OF THE ARTISTS.  
 GEOPOLITICS  
 An entry for geopol it ics in a gloss ary 
devoted to posthu man thought is simul-
tan eously para dox ical and self- evident: 
para dox ical in that the concepts that 
consti tute ‘geo-’ and ‘polit ics’ are so ﬁ rmly 
rooted in human ist tradi tions with human- 
centric  a priori s under pin ning them that 
to consider them without the human 
risks being mean ing less; self- evident in 
that the larger forces of envir on mental 
degrad a tion and geolo gical time coupled 
with poly scaler autonom ous comput ing 
and sensing systems might have already 
removed the ‘geo-’ and polit ics from 
human agency. 
 Th e constants in think ing geopol it ics 
remain the intim ate correl a tions and occa-
sion ally determ in ate rela tion ships between 
terrestrial space and power. Although a 
number of philo soph ers from Aristotle to
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Derrida argues that Kant’s natural law 
found in common posses sion of the earth’s 
surface prohib its anyone from claim ing a 
right to a speciﬁ c spot while exclud ing 
others from so claim ing, for no one has any 
more natural right to a place than any 
other. So there are limits to this law. Th e 
limits of a right to a place on the earth are 
the limits of spher ical space, and the limits 
emerge as the host of insti tu tional limits 
known as bound ary, state, national, public 
or polit ical space. 
 Th e current usage of geopol it ics draws 
on a number of tele- tech no lo gies deployed 
in and through the Cold War into the 
contem por ary moment for poli cing the 
earth and render ing the ‘geo-’/earth 
portion of geopol it ics in speciﬁ c ways that 
hold rami ﬁ c a tions for think ing the polit-
ical, espe cially as it pertains to the notion 
of agency. Th ese same tele- tech no lo gies 
have led to the oft - invoked ‘deter rit ori al iz-
a tion’ of the earth in the most blatant 
recon cep tu al iz a tion of space, sover eignty 
and control. Equally these tele- tech no lo-
gies have further rendered the status of the 
human as polit ical subject, and indeed 
nation as autonom ous entity, in ques tion. 
Much of how Western thought has inter-
preted tele- tech no lo gical devel op ment – as 
McLuhan, Baudrillard, Virilio and others 
have argued – depends on the under stand-
ing of the self or subject as an agent 
enact ing its will upon a world of objects 
(includ ing other subjects). As a result, the 
means by which we can and do imagine 
exten sions of that sensing and acting self 
invari ably fold into and inﬂ u ence the 
inter pret a tion of that self. Multi- sensory 
tele- tech no lo gies as they pertain to the 
implic a tions for the enact ment of agency 
relate funda ment ally to the consti tu tion and 
expres sion of the self and the many systems 
in which it is embed ded, formu lated, 
construc ted, subsumed and artic u lated. 
Remote sensing and tele- tech no lo gies as 
mobil ized by the milit ary – as well as by 
corpor ate and civic organ iz a tions – indeed 
have the poten tial to result in killing at 
a distance, which is clearly a matter of 
a subject controlling and manip u lat ing 
objects. It is the self of mastery and control 
that oft en fuels various tele- tech no lo gical 
drives, and which consti tutes the short-
hand version of the sover eign and polit ical 
subject, or self. Th is self replic ates on the 
micro- level larger form a tions such as 
community, state, globe and a host of other 
cordoned- oﬀ  areas. 
 Th e self as philo soph ical and polit ical 
concept is diﬃ   cult to disen tangle from the 
subject, sover eignty, iden tity and a host of 
other concepts and terms that relate to a 
speciﬁ c stripe of meta phys ics that Derrida 
terms ‘logo centrism’, and Heidegger before 
him calls ‘onto- theo logy’. Much of crit ical 
theory from the 1970s to the present has 
been engaged with this ﬁ gure: the self 
(though mostly as subject). Nancy, in his 
1979 work  Ego Sum , anti cip ates this return 
to the subject but as one that ques tions or 
moves beyond, perhaps out of struc tural 
neces sity, the meta phys ical subject such as 
one ﬁ nds in Derrida’s and Heidegger’s 
critiques. As with the intel lec tual projects 
of Nietzsche, Benjamin, Adorno and 
Derrida – to name but a few of many – 
current condi tions consti tute a need to 
think geopol it ics without a certain kind of 
self at the centre of it: a decent ring that 
iron ic ally results expli citly from the self’s 
concer ted 
tech no lo gical 
attempts 
to 
remain at the centre. 
 Th ese tele- tech no lo gical attempts have 
ﬁ gured the earth- as-globe, which is fully 
bounded, networked and observed in real 
time. Th ese capa cit ies and attrib utes are an 
inher it ance of the Cold War, as are the 
remote sensing systems that led to real- 
time global surveil lance. Obviously all of 
these have a milit ary proven ance. For 
example, the Limited Test Ban Treaty on
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GEOPOLITICS 
nuclear testing signed in 1963 and the 
attend ant require ment to monitor adher-
ence to it through remote sensing systems 
coin cides with the emer gence of the preﬁ x 
‘geo-’ becom ing synonym ous with the 
earth as globe, as stra tegic ally networked 
and completely surveilled entity. Th e preﬁ x 
‘geo-’ clearly conﬂ ates earth with ground 
and surface. Th e ﬁ rst issue of  Th e Journal of 
GeoElectronics (in 1963) under scores the 
moment the ‘geo-’ becomes codi ﬁ ed as 
primar ily a techno- scientiﬁ c engage ment 
with the earth. Th at ﬁ rst issue included an 
intro duct ory medit a tion on the chan ging 
under stand ing of the preﬁ x ‘geo-’ in rela-
tion to tele- tech no lo gical devel op ments. 
Th e journal is now called  Th e Journal for 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing . 
 Satellites play an integ ral role in many 
large- scale remote sensing systems and 
have helped craft  a ‘geo-’ bereft  of territ ory. 
Th ey metonym ic ally mani fest many of the 
ways that modern techno- scientiﬁ c culture 
in the post Second World War moment 
began to ‘world’ and shape the meta phys ics 
of the imagin ary in terms of what worlds 
could and should be. In the ﬁ rst few para-
graphs of his essay, ‘Th e Age of the World 
Picture’, Heidegger ( 2002 ) argues that 
modern ity’s essence coalesces around a 
series of phenom ena includ ing science’s 
most visible mani fest a tion as machine 
tech no logy, itself using speciﬁ c forms of 
math em at ics to realize its visib il ity and 
power. Th is situ ation aligns modern 
science with modern meta phys ics. Further 
he argues that within the very late modern-
ity of the middle part of the twen ti eth 
century, art moves into the world of 
aesthet ics and thus becomes a means for 
simul tan eously creat ing and artic u lat ing 
human exper i ence. All of this culmin ates 
in human action being under stood as 
culture, which then means that culture 
artic u lates the highest of human achieve-
ment and care, with care being conver ted 
into ‘the polit ics of culture’. Heidegger 
brings math em at ics, science, machine 
tech no logy, art, aesthet ics, culture and 
meta phys ics together in a penet rat ing view 
of the legacies of twentieth- century traject-
or ies that further lead to an elision of 
human culture as a primary driving force 
of geopol it ical concep tu al iz a tion. 
 Th e cultural geopol it ics of Heidegger’s 
inter pret a tion of modern ity’s gener ated 
meta phys ics can be charted in the capa city 
for repres ent a tion to equate with exper i-
ence and the real, for the map to create the 
territ ory and the tech no lo gical means for 
carto graphic repres ent a tion to become the 
tools for human ‘world ing’. Peter Sloterdijk’s 
expans ive medit a tion on spheres and the 
meta phys ical lineage of the globe as 
human goal and achieve ment argues post-
Heidegger that ‘at no time, however – not 
even in the age of space travel – could the 
enter prise of visu al iz ing the earth deny its 
semi- meta phys ical quality. Anyone who 
wished to attempt a portrait of the whole 
earth aft er the down fall of heaven stood, 
know ingly or not, in the tradi tion of 
ancient occi dental meta phys ical cosmo-
graphy’ (2014: 774). 
 Benjamin Bratton in   Th e Stack: Soft ware 
and Sovereignty (2016), contra Sloterdijk, 
‘devel ops a new model of polit ical 
geography and systems design for the early 
era of plan et ary- scale compu ta tion’ that 
steps beyond this occi dental meta phys ical 
cosmo graphy. Bratton links infra struc ture 
at many mater ial and percep tual scales to 
examine multi- layered struc tures of soft -
ware, hard ware and network ‘stacks’ that 
operate inde pend ently and inter de pend-
ently at modular levels. Using the logic 
of plat forms, he outlines ‘an altern at ive sub-
 di vi sion of polit ical geograph ies at work 
now and in the future’ that lead from 
the supposed ‘eclipse of the nation- state to 
the ascend ance of polit ical theo logy as 
an exist en tial transna tion al ism, from the
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
GREEN/ENVIRONMENTAL HUMANITIES
billow ing depths of cloud comput ing and 
ubiquit ous address ab il ity to the logist ical 
modern ity of the endlessly itin er ant object’ 
oper at ing in polit ical insti tu tional refor-
mu la tion amidst massive wealth realign-
ments and ecolo gical collapse on a 
plan et ary scale (ibid.). 
 Bratton’s argu ment can be furthered by 
examin ing any of the host of current poly-
scaler remote sensing systems, such as 
Hewlett-Packard’s Central Nervous System 
for the Earth (Ce NSE ) or the  NGO project 
called Th e Planetary Skin Institute. Ce NSE 
uses ‘Smart Dust’,  1 a nano- sensing project 
described by its creat ors as ‘autonom ous 
sensing and commu nic a tion in a cubic 
milli metre’. Hewlett-Packard intends to 
distrib ute a tril lion of these micro- sensors 
from the bottom of the ocean and up into 
space. Smart Dust coupled with Ce NSE 
was funded by  DARPA (with  HP part ner-
ing with Shell in its current form a tion) and 
thus has milit ary and corpor ate applic a-
tions designed for oﬀ ens ive battle ﬁ eld 
use and proﬁ t- driven surveil lance. Th e 
Planetary Skin Institute, accord ing to its 
website, intends its ‘plat form to serve as a 
global public good’ through auto mated, 
multi- user, Web 2.0, sensor- satur ated 
global cover age of ‘change events’. Th e 
language, the tech no lo gies, the touted 
bene ﬁ ts, the agen cies allowed are the 
same for Ce NSE and Th e Planetary Skin 
Institute – and, as previ ously noted, their 
ante cedents date back to the Cold War, 
test ban treat ies and exper i mental closed 
systems of auto mated sensing and ﬁ ring in 
the Vietnam War. Th e only diﬀ er ences 
between these poly scaler, auto mated and 
autonom ous remote sensing systems can 
be found in their stated inten ded use – 
diﬀ er ences and uses that can be altered 
with the ﬂ ip of a switch. And  who or  what 
ﬂ ips that switch – nation- state, inter na-
tional corpor a tion, self- adjust ing algorithm 
or auto mated response to futures invest-
ment and spec u la tion for imme di ate proﬁ t- 
gains – sets the current posthu man agenda 
for think ing geopol it ics. 
 In much the same way that the Cold 
War removed speciﬁ c spatial formu la tions 
for polit ical decision making in rela tion 
to ﬁ xed space by ﬂ at ten ing the earth into 
an oxymor onic globe with no horizon, 
these new plat forms outstrip national 
sover eignty and governance in a host of 
inten ded and unin ten ded ways.  DARPA ’s 
website slogan is ‘Creating and Preventing 
Strategic Surprise’. However, the elim in a-
tion of the event will have been determ-
ined by an inde term in ate object that senses 
as a subject, commu nic ates as a subject and 
yet does not and cannot enact its own will: 
it is merely a node in a network shut tling 
data. Th is might describe the posi tion of 
popu la tions and govern ments, known as 
subjects in polit ics and philo sophy, just as 
easily as it does the smart dust chip. 
 See also  Algorithmic Studies; Bodies 
Politic; Earth; Non- human Agency; War.  
 Note 
    1. 
See Smart Dust project website, http://
robot ics.eecs.berke ley.edu/~pister/
SmartDust/ [accessed 7 February 2017].  
 Ryan Bishop 
 GREEN/ENVIRONMENTAL 
HUMANITIES  
 Since the early 2000s, there has been strong 
scientiﬁ c consensus on the need for an 
inter dis cip lin ary ﬁ eld capable to address 
the complex soci etal rela tions to both 
natural and built envir on ments ( Braidotti 
et al. 2013 ;  Dolphijn 2013 ). Th is timely ‘call 
to arms’ has coin cided with the growing 
aware ness of the impact of anthro po genic
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GREEN/ENVIRONMENTAL HUMANITIES 
activ it ies on the global envir on ment. In 
2000, Nobel laur eate Paul Crutzen and 
biolo gist Eugene Stoermer named the 
current geolo gical epoch ‘Anthropocene’ 
(2000: 17) to emphas ize the role of human-
kind in geology and ecology. In their short 
article, Crutzen and Stoermer predict that, 
without any major cata strophe, humans 
will remain a major geolo gical force for 
millen nia, even millions of years, to come. 
Hence, they urge the scientiﬁ c community 
‘[t]o develop a world- wide accep ted 
strategy leading to sustain ab il ity of ecosys-
tems against human induced stresses’ and 
call for ‘intens ive research eﬀ orts and wise 
applic a tion of the know ledge thus acquired 
in the noösphere’ (ibid.: 18).  1 
 Th is 
framing 
of 
the 
notion 
of 
Anthropocene betrays, nonethe less, a faith 
in modern ist theor ies of tech no logy and 
progress that places the human outside 
of nature and thus reduces nature to a 
passive object of culture. According to 
Gisli Pálsson et  al. ( 2013 ), the taken- for-
granted unnat ur al ness of the human is 
itself part of the envir on mental problem. 
To deal with global envir on mental change, 
they state, it is neces sary to start from a 
concep tion of the envir on mental as inex-
tric ably entangled with the social and thus 
return our atten tion to social theory and 
the human it ies to eﬀ ect ively face the 
human and soci etal chal lenges posed by it. 
Th e appre ci ation of the envir on ment and 
the human as ‘nature cul tures’ ( Haraway 
2003 ) will inev it ably produce a radical 
reshap ing of the notion of envir on mental 
respons ib il ity and foster an ecolo gical – 
rela tional – approach to systemic change. 
 Over the last decades, the term ‘envir on-
mental human it ies’ has been gaining ground 
to desig nate the inter dis cip lin ary area 
capable to promote such a concep tual shift . 
According to femin ist philo sopher Rosi 
Braidotti et al. ( 2013 ), the ﬁ rst import ant and 
original contri bu tion of the envir on mental 
human it ies to envir on mental issues is their 
ability to ques tion the tenets of what is 
commonly under stood as the human condi-
tion in the age of the Anthropocene. Th is can 
help develop a better under stand ing of 
human agency and human beings’ inter ac-
tion with the ecolo gical communit ies they 
are part of. Th e envir on mental human it ies 
bring ques tions of meaning, value, ethics, 
justice and the polit ics of know ledge produc-
tion into envir on mental domains, thus 
artic u lat ing a notion of human ity that 
rejects modern ist accounts of self- contained, 
rational, decision making subjects ( Bird 
Rose et al. 2012 ). Rather, ‘the envir on mental 
human it ies posi tion us as parti cipants in 
lively ecolo gies of meaning and value, 
entangled within rich patterns of cultural 
and histor ical diversity that shape who we 
are and the ways in which we are able to 
“become with” others’ (ibid.: 2). At the core of 
this approach is a focus on those ‘new mater-
i al ist’ ( Dolphijn and van der Tuin 2012 ), 
non- dualist 
philo sophies/prac tices 
that 
propose to see the world as the result of the 
intra- active work ings of more- than-human 
assemblages. In short, by oper at ing in the 
nexus between modern ist oppos i tions and 
dual isms, they promote a vision of the whole 
world as a ‘natur al cul tural contact zone’ 
( Haraway 2008 : 7) where the ‘natural world’ 
is not just the passive back ground or 
container for human activ ity and doings, but 
an active factor in its iter at ive mater i al iz a tion 
( Barad 2007 ). To para phrase Australian 
philo sopher Val Plumwood ( 2003 ), the 
envir on mental human it ies are engaged in an 
oper a tion aimed at resitu at ing the human 
within nature, and non- humans within 
cultural and ethical domains. 
 Braidotti et al. ( 2013 ) mention a second 
import ant contri bu tion of the envir on-
mental human it ies: their ability to chal-
lenge the discip lin ary separ a tion between 
the human, social and natural sciences. 
Deborah Bird Rose and others, much on
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
GREEN/ENVIRONMENTAL HUMANITIES
the same line, state that ‘the emer gence of 
the envir on mental human it ies indic ates a 
renewed emphasis on bring ing various 
approaches to envir on mental schol ar ship 
into conver sa tion with each other in 
numer ous and diverse ways’ (2012: 1–2). In 
general, the approaches coales cing under 
the banner of the envir on mental human i -
t ies expli citly reject the assumed ‘non- 
scien ti ﬁ  city’ of human it ies work on the 
envir on ment, a critique that is still too 
much enmeshed with narrow concep tu al iz a-
tions of ‘human agency, social and cultural 
form a tion, social change and the entangled 
rela tions between human and non- human 
worlds’ (ibid.: 2). Th is eﬀ ort has produced 
the emer gence of a wide range of novel 
inter dis cip lin ary approaches to schol ar ship 
that ‘bridge’ the natural, human and social 
science and put them in renewed dialogue. 
Among these, it is worth mention ing Bio
Art prac tices, which, as Dolphijn ( 2013 ) 
reminds us, are making a vital contri bu tion 
in tack ling import ant ques tions regard ing 
the Anthropocene, the ecolo gical crises and 
sustain ab il ity in general. Th rough these 
and other prac tices, the envir on mental 
human it ies have proven capable of provid-
ing distinct ive research tools, present ing 
preced ents and complex narrat ive schemes 
that oﬀ er histor ical perspect ives on social- 
envir on mental chal lenges that we face. 
 Th e non- dualist approach of the envir-
on mental human it ies with respect to both 
the (non-)human and schol ar ship is ﬁ nally 
respons ible for a revital iz a tion of ethics into 
a posthu man ist space of care and respons i-
b il ity. Moving away from a notion of 
ethics as human attrib ute and thus still too 
preoc cu pied with moral dilem mas, environ-
mental human it ies attend to the entan gle-
ment of human and non- human forms of 
life and invite a kind of account ab il ity that 
tran scends the human ist sphere of agency. 
Ethics, in a natur al cul tural world, implies 
account ab il ity for what comes to matter 
( Haraway 1988 ) as well as the power diﬀ er-
en tials that are crucially part of wordly re- 
conﬁ g ur ings ( Barad 2007 , 2012). In this 
respect, envir on mental human it ies are 
partic u larly suited to address gender, racial 
and post co lo nial dimen sions, and stress the 
entangled nature of social and envir on-
mental justice ( Nixon 2011 ;  Chakrabarty 
2009 ). As femin ist philo sopher Karen Barad 
states, in a natur al cul tural world, ques tions 
of ethics and justice ‘are always already 
threaded through the very fabric of the 
world’ in such a way that ‘epistem o logy, 
onto logy, and ethics are insep ar able’ (in 
 Dolphijn and van der Tuin 2012 : 69). 
 To conclude, the envir on mental human-
it ies appear to have picked up philo sopher 
and activ ist Félix Guattari’s ([1989] 2000, 
[1992] 1995) call to use the current ecolo-
gical crisis and sustain ab il ity issues as an 
‘oppor tun ity’ to redeﬁ ne human ity as a 
whole, and work towards the devel op ment 
of an ecosoph ical perspect ive/logic. 2 In 
helping us to under stand how indi vidu als 
and soci et ies respond to global envir on-
mental change, envir on mental human it ies 
contrib ute to our under stand ing of factors 
likely to enhance the human capa city to 
trans form paradigms in think ing and 
patterns of beha viour. Finally, the devel op-
ment of this inter dis cip lin ary ﬁ eld  3 shows 
the entan gle ment of the human it ies and 
the sciences as well as a renewed ethico- 
polit ical prac tice of rela tion al ity and 
mutual entail ment as the basis for produ-
cing systemic change and working towards 
sustain able futures. 
 See also  Algorithmic Studies; Bodies 
Politic; Earth; Non- human Agency; War.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GULF LABOR 
1966 ) to indic ate ‘a human sphere, a 
sphere of reﬂ ec tion, of conscious inven-
tion, of conscious souls’ (63). He con-
ceived the noösphere as discon tinu ous 
and super ior to the animal biosphere, and 
there fore capable of deﬁ n ing the next 
stage of terrestrial evol u tion through the 
trans form a tion of the biosphere.  
 2. Ecosophy, for Félix Guattari ( [1989] 
2000 , [1992] 1995), is a ‘gener al ized 
ecology’ that seeks to rethink human 
praxis in its rela tion to three ecolo gies: 
the envir on ment, the social rela tions and 
subjectiv ity. 
 3. See, for instance, journ als such as 
 Environmental Humainties (http://envir
 on ment al hu man it ies.org) and  Resilience 
(http://www.resi li ence journal.org). 
 Tobijn de Graauw and 
Elisa Fiore 
 GULF LABOR  
 Gulf labour / high culture / hard labour / in 
a racial ized ultra luxury global economy / 
with ultra low wages / black and brown 
bodies / South Asian migrant workers / sell 
land / pawn gold / incur debt / leave family / 
pursue a false dream / for better life / 
shackled by recruit ment debt / pass ports 
conﬁ s cated / tied and beholden to a single 
employer / lose your employer, lose your 
visa / organ ize, you’re imprisoned and 
depor ted / no human dignity / but workers 
strike / together / across national and ethnic 
iden tit ies / WhatsApp used / organ ized over 
tea / unions not involved / there are no 
leaders / labour camps / bach elor camps / 
surveil lance / polit ics emerges from mater-
ial condi tions / do not board buses / shut-
downs and slow downs / and emer gence of 
transna tional solid ar ity / target Guggenheim 
New York / occu pa tions / creat ive direct 
actions / boycotts / deco lo nial prac tice / on 
the ground research / worker public a tions / 
voice ampli ﬁ c a tion / heart of empire / 
Demands, non- nego ti able: Debt Jubilee / 
Living Wage / Worker Representation. In 
solid ar ity /  GULF  LABOR  
 High Culture 
 On Saadiyat Island in Abu Dhabi, meaning 
in Arabic ‘Happiness Island’, we see monu-
ments to ‘culture’ woven into a monstrous 
assemblage of fossil fuels, ﬁ nan cial power 
and imper ial geopol it ics. Saadiyat cultural 
district, which spans a total area of 2.43 
square kilo metres, includes an £85 million 
Louvre museum set to open in 2017, as 
well as a Guggenheim Abu Dhabi by Frank 
Gehry, the Sheikh Zayed National Museum 
by Foster + Partners, and a Performing 
Arts Centre by Zaha Hadid. 
 Ultra Luxury 
 Th e global cultural brands setting up in 
Abu Dhabi – Guggenheim, Louvre, British 
Museum,  NYU – claim zero respons ib il ity 
for exploit a tion and poor worker condi-
tions. Th ey insist that the prob lems of 
the workers should be addressed to the 
govern ment, to the subcon tract ors, to the 
middle men, to the ‘sending country’, but 
 Returned migrant workers from  UAE , Telangana, 
India, January 2015.  IMAGE BY  MTL .
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 Left: Site of death of a 28-year- old Pakistani worker on 8 June 2015, Louvre Abu Dhabi.  
 Right: Image from a crane installing the stars on the Louvre, Abu Dhabi, July 2015.  IMAGES BY 
ANONYM OUS LOUVRE WORKERS.     
 Louvre Museum Abu Dhabi, March 2016.  IMAGE BY ANONYM OUS LOUVRE WORKER.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
GULF LABOR 
lever age they refuse to acknow ledge. 
 Hard Labour 
 Th ese monu ments are built on the backs of 
migrant workers from Bangladesh, India, 
Pakistan, Nepal, Philippines, Sri Lanka 
and, most recently, Cameroon, Uganda 
and Nigeria, who migrated for a better 
future for them selves and their famil ies. 
Th ey are drawn to the Gulf by economic 
precar ity in their home coun tries, and 
typic ally end up bonded to their work 
through debt under the kafala system, to 
work in construc tion.  
 Ultra Low Wages 
 Th e workers who have been build ing the 
Louvre and the infra struc ture for the rest of 
these cultural insti tu tions are housed in 
remote, segreg ated and surveilled worker 
camps. Th ey incur substan tial debt to leave 
their home country to obtain construc tion 
work that pays very little. Th ey have no 
right to worker repres ent a tion or any form 
of collect ive bargain ing. Th ey organ ize 
strikes, slow downs and the like when they 
are not paid for months or in response to 
poor living condi tions or poor food. In 
retali ation, 
punish ments 
levelled 
by 
employ ers are oft en harsh. Th ey include 
indis crim in ate impris on ment or deport a-
tion, or both.  
 Worker Resistance 
 From the May Day 2016 action in Saudi 
Arabia where workers set ﬁ re to seven 
buses belong ing to one of the largest 
construc tion compan ies over unpaid 
wages, to the shut down of a mall and a 
 G.U.L.F. projec tion action on the facade of the Guggenheim for May Day 2016 in collab or a tion with 
Illuminator in Hindi, Telugu, Punjabi and Arabic languages.   IMAGE BY G.U.L.F.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
highway in Dubai in March 2015, and to 
smaller every day acts of resist ance against 
abusive super visors and managers, workers 
are at the fore front of struggles to better 
their condi tions, focus ing on wages and 
labour reforms that chal lenge the very 
terms of Gulf petro capit al ism, which is 
itself embed ded in ﬂ ows of global capital 
and labour. 
 Action/Amplifi cation 
 Gulf Labor is a chain of resist ance across 
geograph ies ampli fy ing the demands of 
the workers in the Gulf. Direct actions in 
the Gulf by the workers and in New York 
and Venice by Global Ultra Luxury Faction 
(G.U.L.F.) and Gulf Labor Coalition 
( GLC ) target both global systems and 
local condi tions at once. G.U.L.F. and the 
 GLC disrupt and refuse the role that art 
now plays in the normal func tion ing of a 
global system that propag ates racism and 
inequal ity in its shadows. In the broader 
horizon of decol on iz a tion and climate 
justice, these small actions make visible 
that capit al ism has always been hostile to 
human and non- human life, and that 
people ﬁ ght where they are for a shared 
horizon of liber a tion and human dignity, 
excav at ing in the process a culture of deep 
solid ar ity and togeth er ness. 
 See 
also 
Art; 
Contemporary; 
the; 
Commons; the; Organization in Platform 
Capitalism. 
 MTL Collective (Nitasha 
Dhillon and Amin Husain)
HACKING HABITAT 
an integ ral part of our habitat, but also 
change the power struc tures that permeate 
these envir on ments. To hack the habitat 
thus means to re- estab lish a conscious 
rela tion ship with and through machines, to 
crit ic ally invest ig ate how we are caught up 
in systems, and explore ways of resist ance. 
 HACKING  HABITAT was a large- 
scale inter na tional mani fest a tion on the 
bound ar ies between art, tech no logy and 
social change, and consisted of three 
compon ents: a run- up with four Life Hack 
Marathons in 2015, an expand ing Art 
Exhibition, and an Open Stage in 2016. 
Around eighty artists, hackers and design-
ers presen ted their work, prepared inter-
ven tions and provided work shops to 
reﬂ ect and act upon the oft en invis ible but 
struc tural contain ment we ﬁ nd ourselves 
 HACKING HABITAT  
 Across the globe, more and more of our 
daily exper i ences are managed and 
surveilled by network ing tech no lo gies, 
system proto cols and algorithms, result-
ing  in a ‘remote control society’, where 
ubiquit ous, networked systems – from 
corpor a tions to polit ics, from milit ary to 
enter tain ment – inﬂ u ence and domin ate 
our surround ings. Th e internal mech an-
isms of insti tu tions have begun to lead 
their own life – services are auto mated, 
data is the new currency, and optimum 
eﬃ   ciency has become the norm, as exem-
pli ﬁ ed by every one’s proper adjust ment to 
machines. Technological devel op ments 
not only satur ate our envir on ments – 
social, natural and cultural – consti tut ing 
 H 
 James Beckett, Voodoo Justice for People of Finance, install a tion in  HACKING   HABITAT , 2016. 
PHOTO: PETER COX.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
world, managing to elude intrus ive forms 
of regu la tion and coding. Citizens ﬁ nd 
each other in the battle. 
 Life Hacking 
 In the run- up to the projects’ ulti mate real-
iz a tion, human feed back was collec ted 
during four Life Hack Marathons. Life 
hacking is not a trick or luxuri ous 
commod ity to manage time even more 
eﬃ   ciently, but rather results from a ‘maker 
mental ity’ ( Walter-Herrmann and Büching 
2013 ). Moreover, life hacking is based on 
the work of Michel de Certeau. In  Th e 
Practice of Everyday Life  (1984) he exam-
ines the diﬀ er ence between strategies 
that aﬃ  rm the status quo of the power ful 
– govern ments, banks, multina tion als, 
cultural hege mon ies – and the ﬂ ex ible 
tactics of those who are subjec ted to power. 
According to him, the power less have a 
diﬀ er ent kind of power. With their indir ect 
and errant traject or ies they clev erly and 
skil fully bend the rules in order to survive 
while retain ing their culture, iden tity and 
dignity. Life hacking is thus about search-
ing for shared solid ar ity and (post)human-
ness to discover playful forms of civil 
disobedi ence ( Celikates and de Zeeuw 
2016 ) to ﬁ ght the power that has grown 
nomadic and imma ter ial. 
 Art and culture has a crucial role to play 
in the process of hacking habitat: as a 
channel of empower ment, self- organ iz a tion, 
and control of ‘social capital’ and creativ ity 
for communit ies, allow ing for local know-
ledge to become an inspir a tional force in a 
wider global context. Deliberately choos ing 
a support ing role, artists can develop test 
models for new ecolo gies of belong ing. 
Interventions by Aram Bartholl, Henrik 
van 
Leeuwen, 
Forensic 
Architecture, 
Melanie Bonajo, Circus Engelbregt, Kendell 
Geers, Lino Hellings, Buro Jansen & Janssen, 
Samson Kambalu, Van Lunteren/ Kastelein, 
in. Controlling tech no lo gies are simul tan-
eously both sexy and fright en ing. Whereas 
the panop ticon was once inven ted as a 
‘humane’ model to control and discip line 
pris on ers, now we wilfully accept mass 
surveil lance and beha viour regu la tion in 
exchange for free inter net and smart apps. 
Th e choice for a real prison for the ﬁ nal 
exhib i tion thus logic ally follows the initial 
concept, strength en ing exper i ences of 
digital constraint, with the smart phone as 
our new panop ticon. 
 Developing A-Whereness 
 As Stefania Milan
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
HYPERSEA 
Girl at South London Gallery on 26 July 
2014. Th e story was an ode to wetware 
next to the liter ally dry, silicon- based 
transhuman ism discus sion. It took place in 
an oceanic lounge setting consist ing of sea 
sponge bag chairs, blue light and water 
pops icles. Th e spatial aspect was supposed 
to enhance the listen ers’ exper i ence of 
being water, while depict ing humans as 
water’s avatars. Here, I was inter ested in 
both the univer sal ist side of acknow ledging 
ourselves as part of a larger, aqueous 
ecology as well as break ing the extropian 
illu sion of getting rid of the wetware of 
the human state alto gether by saying 
that, in fact, the more reﬁ ned a tech no lo-
gical process is the more it uses (virtual) 
water. 
 Th e work is part of  New Degrees of 
Freedom , a perform ance series with an 
online compon ent, as conceived together 
!Mediengruppe Bitnik, Ansh Patel, Renée 
Ridway, 
Merlijn 
Twaalfh oven, 
Dries 
Verhoeven and the Centre for Political 
Beauty substan tially and construct ively 
break the rules. Going against the ﬂ ow, they 
plant viruses mobil iz ing counter forces 
and taking over public spaces as new places 
for nego ti ation. Th e emer ging fric tions 
become tools for trans form a tion. 
 See also Art; Digital Citizenship; Expulsions; 
Stateless State. 
 Ine Gevers 
 HYPERSEA  
 New Degrees of Freedom, Act 3: Water was 
an audio play and an install a tion as part of 
the event Th e Posthuman Era Became a 
 Susan Hiller, Die Gedanken sind Frei, 2013, install a tion in  HACKING   HABITAT , 2016.  PHOTO: PETER 
COX.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
  Jenna Sutela with Johanna Lundberg:  New Degrees of Freedom, Act 3: Water , 2014. Audio play, sea 
sponge bag chairs, blue light and water pops icles.   PHOTOS: FELICITY HAMMOND.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
HYPERSOCIAL 
with graphic designer Johanna Lundberg. 
Th e project has its premise on the idea that 
the body can no longer be eman cip ated 
online as the inter net has proved to be 
not virtual enough. Instead, it explores 
diﬀ er ent means to iden tity ﬂ uid ity and 
autonom ous zones in the oﬄ  ine world. 
 See 
also  
Blue 
Humanities; 
Forests; 
Postglacial; Vertigo Sea 
 Jenna Sutela 
 HYPERSOCIAL  
 Th e term ‘hyper so cial’ appears at the end of 
Jean Baudrillard’s pamph let  In the Shadow 
of the Silent Majorities  and describes what 
he calls the ‘hyper real iz a tion of the social’, 
that is the trans form a tion of the social  from 
refer ent to model  ( Baudrillard 1983 : 85). In 
Baudrillard’s anti- human ist, post mod ern 
philo sophy, the social does not desig nate a 
univer sal, but it is endowed only with an 
‘ephem eral exist ence’, falling between pre- 
modern and post mod ern soci et ies, that is 
‘soci et ies without the social’ which func tion 
through ‘networks of symbolic ties’ and 
soci et ies which are in the process of putting 
‘an end to the social beneath a simu la tion of 
the social’ (ibid.: 67). In modern soci et ies, 
the social expressed a ‘dynamic abstrac tion’ 
resting on the hypo thesis of the exist ence of 
‘social rela tions’; it oper ated as a ‘func tional 
integ ra tion of remain ders’ (such as the 
‘excluded’ who were taken in charge by the 
modern State); and func tioned as ‘scene of 
conﬂ icts and histor ical contra dic tions’ (83). 
Th e modern notion of the social thus 
implies a ‘reality prin ciple’ produced by a 
‘cent ral ized perspectival space’ which 
enables eﬀ ects of ‘meaning and truth’ (68). 
As such, then, for Baudrillard ‘the social 
dies in the space of simu la tion’, where there 
is ‘no crit ical, spec u lat ive distance’, but 
‘projec tion of models in the real’ consti tut-
ing an ‘in-the-ﬁ eld, here- and-now, trans ﬁ g-
ur a tion of the real into the model’ (83). Like 
the hyper real, the hyper so cial abol ishes the 
social ‘not by violent destruc tion, but by its 
assump tion, elev a tion to the strength of the 
model’ (84). Th e hyper so cial, thus, indic ates 
the trans form a tion of the social from refer-
ent to model, which activ ates a strategy 
of ‘[d]eterrence of all real poten ti al ity’ 
oper at ing ‘by metic u lous redu plic a tion, by 
macro scopic hyper ﬁ  del ity, by accel er ated 
recyc ling, by satur a tion and obscen ity, by 
abol i tion of the distance between the real 
and its repres ent a tion’ (85). One of the 
consequences of this new conﬁ g ur a tion for 
Baudrillard is that the hyper so cial puts an 
end to the ‘social ist illu sion’, that is the idea 
that there exists a ‘ “real” social ity, a hidden 
social ity’, which can ground social ism as 
the ‘optimal collect ive manage ment of men 
and things’ (80). While Marx dreamed of 
the re- absorp tion of the economic into a 
‘(trans ﬁ gured) social’, for Baudrillard what 
we are witness ing is the re- absorp tion 
of the social ‘into a (banal ised) polit ical 
economy: admin is tra tion pure and simple’ 
(81). For Baudrillard, hence, the hyper -
so cial is the reverse of social ism, that is it is 
the culmin a tion of the process by which the 
social ﬁ rst abol ished the polit ical and then 
with the hyper so cial became reab sorbed 
into the economic (81). 
 Baudrillard’s refer ence to the end of the 
social and the rise of the hyper so cial haunts 
contem por ary discus sions of new forms of 
social ity instan ti ated by the trans form a tion 
of the social into an ‘inform a tion visu al iz a-
tion’ which oper ates as the model through 
which new type of media (social media) 
operate. Th is model is the ‘social network’ 
based in the math em at ical abstrac tion 
of graph theory – a model which both 
duplic ates and informs the social in new 
ways ( Lovink 2012 ). Th e most evident sites 
of such recon ﬁ g ur a tion are social media
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
plat forms (such as Facebook, Twitter, 
Google+, Instagram, LinkedIn and the like) 
which can thus be seen, from the point of 
view of Baudrillard’s hyper so cial, as the 
means by which the modern social is 
absorbed into a new medium, the social 
network, which recon ﬁ g ures the social as a 
process of circu la tion secured by network 
proto cols ( Foucault 2009 ;  Terranova 2015 ). 
Contemporary critiques of the social of 
social media plat forms echo Baudrillard 
when they argue that the social modelled by 
social networks is a ‘social without society’ 
which enacts new forms of control and 
fore closes the possib il ity of solid ar ity and 
iden ti ﬁ c a tion with the collect ive while also 
sever ing all links with social repro duc tion 
such as theor ized by femin ist polit ical 
econom ists ( Dean 2013 ;  Fortunati 2007 ). 
Such new conﬁ g ur a tion of the ‘social’ is 
argued to be func tional to a ‘re- organ iz a tion 
of neolib eral govern ment al ity’ and its tech-
no lo gies of algorithmic governance ( Davies 
2015 ;  Morozov 2014 ). Th e new social or 
hyper so cial enacted by social network 
models is thus said to enact a process of 
further dissol u tion of social bonds, which 
dissolves society into networks of isol ated 
indi vidu als ( Turkle 2011 ;  Berardi 2009 ). 
Most of these analyses do not follow 
Baudrillard’s anti- human ist post- struc tur-
al ism in as much as they evoke the modern 
social as space of conﬂ ict and contra dic tion, 
solid ar ity and collectiv ity, against the 
subsump tion of the social into a model of 
‘optimal circu la tion’ – Baudrillard’s hyper-
so cial as a space of deterrence. 
 Other eval u ations of the ‘hyper so cial’, 
however, conceive it as express ing the 
poten tial for renewed forms of social ism 
and/or commun ism which do not neces si -
t ate state plan ning or cent ral ized control 
(Kelly 2009;  Hardt and Negri 2009 ). On the 
one hand, liberal theor ists argue for the 
radical novelty intro duced by social 
produc tion in the networked inform a tion 
economy (such as Open Source soft  ware or 
Wikipedia) which chal lenge the hege mony 
of the market ( Benkler 2006 ;  Rifk in 2014 ). 
From this perspect ive the hyper so cial is an 
‘augmen ted social’ which aﬀ ords the possib-
il ity of a trans ition to post- capit al ist p2p 
commons- based soci et ies ( Bauwens 2014 ). 
On the other hand, Autonomist Marxists 
see social cooper a tion as the onto lo gical 
source of value produc tion (living labour) 
which become increas ingly autonom ous 
from capit al ist organ iz a tion by incor por at-
ing portions of ﬁ xed capital in a new conﬁ g-
ur a tion called ‘biopol it ical produc tion’ and/
or ‘cognit ive capit al ism’ ( Vercellone 2007 ). 
Th e hyper so cial here bears the poten tial of a 
‘becom ing autonom ous of social cooper a-
tion’ which is played out in the struggle to 
re- appro pri ate forms of plat form cooper-
ativ ism against the capit al ist subsump tion 
of the sharing economy ( Scholz 2016 ). In 
this way, such enhanced social cooper a tion 
resur rects the dream of a social ist cyber net-
ics which over comes the limit a tions of 
cent ral ized state plan ning and requires a 
trans ition towards an anthro po gen etic 
socio- economic model founded in a new 
form of welfare called ‘common fare’ ( Dyer-
Witheford 2013 ;  Marazzi 2007 ;  Vercellone 
2015 ). 
 Against Baudrillard’s reduc tion ist notion 
of matter, his hypo stat iz a tion of pre- 
modern soci et ies as ‘the real’ and his meta-
phys ics of reality and appear ance, it is 
desir able to trans form the notion of the 
hyper so cial into a concept which names a 
singu lar ity where the decline of the 
modern image of the social and the rise 
of a new image produced by means of 
inform a tional and compu ta tional tech no-
lo gies of tele- commu nic a tion enacts new 
conﬁ g ur a tions of power and resist ance 
( Foucault 2001 ) or strategies of capture 
and lines of ﬂ ight ( Deleuze 1992b ). 
 Contemporary engage ments with the 
hyper so cial thus raise a set of ques tions
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
HYPERSOCIAL 
and gesture towards the crit ical posthu-
man it ies. To start with, the hyper so cial 
provokes us to produce new forms of crit-
ical know ledge which defy neo- posit iv ist 
and shallow forms of social analysis and 
quan ti ﬁ c a tion without return ing to the 
modern, human ist social of clas sical soci-
ology ( Braidotti 2013 ). Such crit ical know-
ledges might include: crit ical gene a lo gies 
of social soft  ware as biopol it ical dispos i tifs 
of power/know ledge and in general new 
approaches to the study of auto ma tion, 
compu ta tion and algorithms ( Rieder 
2012b ;  Kaldrack and Röhle 2014 ;  Parisi 
2013b ); non- anthro po centric philo sophies 
of the social or ‘cosmic soci olo gies’ 
which see matter and life (organic and 
nonor ganic) as consti tuted by aﬀ ect ive 
energy- ﬂ ows and forces of asso ci ation/
disso ci ation ( Tarde 2012 ); aﬃ  rm at ive 
critiques and trans ﬁ g ur a tions of polit ical 
economy and neo- clas sical econom ics 
which formu late new theor ies of labour 
and value/s ( Lazzarato 2002 ;  Latour and 
Lépinay 2009 ); aﬃ  rm at ive contest a tions of 
the polit ics of Big Data ( Blackman 2015 ); 
and carto graph ies which specify the new 
nature of processes of subjectiv a tion 
(includ ing racial iz a tion and sexu al iz a tion) 
in social network onto lo gies ( Nakamura 
and Chow-White 2011 ;  Sharma 2013 ; 
 Terranova 2016 ). 
 See 
also 
Networked 
Aﬀ ect; 
Youth; 
Algorithm; Computational Turn. 
 Tiziana Terranova
Empire and control, which subsumes iden-
tity and diﬀ er ence into its logic of 
governance. As such, we bear witness to the 
contin ued erasure of embod i ment and the 
cotermin ous prolif er a tion of what Critical 
Art Ensemble labels the ‘data body’ ( Critical 
Art Ensemble 1998 ). Donna Haraway once 
artic u lated this prob lem atic as ‘the inform-
at ics of domin a tion’, the coming commu-
nic a tions networks of control that trans late 
‘the world into a problem of coding’ 
( Haraway 1991 : 161, 164); a biomet ric 
template to police national borders, an 
instant credit check to determ ine economic 
viab il ity, a gene to determ ine sexual orient-
a tion. Amongst teeming transna tional ﬂ ows 
of inform a tion, Haraway is careful to 
remind us that ‘People are nowhere near so 
ﬂ uid, being both mater ial and opaque’ (ibid.: 
153). Th is erad ic a tion of opaque excess by 
inform atic stand ard iz a tion Glissant might 
call trans par ency. As an Enlightenment 
prin ciple of univer sal ism, trans par ency, for 
Glissant, claims to make a person fully 
intel li gible and inter pretable, and thus is a 
barbar ism, as it destroys the opacity of 
another. 
 Opacity is a paradig matic concept to pit 
against the univer sal stand ards of inform-
atic iden ti ﬁ c a tion. According to Glissant, 
opacity persists as onto logy – it is the 
world in rela tion. Th erefore, struggles for 
opacity are not oriented towards gaining 
opacity, as we are always already opaque; 
rather, it is that power viol ates opacity, 
which must be resisted as a commit ment 
to anti- imper ial polit ics. Th is is precisely 
 INFORMATIC OPACITY  
 As early as the 1970s, Caribbean philo-
sopher and poet Édouard Glissant theor-
ized opacity as an anti- imper ial modal ity of 
rela tion and exist ence. His evoc at ive 
demand that ‘we clamor for the right to 
opacity for every one’ refuses a logic of total 
trans par ency and ration al ity, disrupt ing the 
trans form a tion of subjects into categor iz-
able objects of Western know ledge ( Glissant 
1997 : 194). Opacity, Glissant tells us, 
concerns ‘that which protects the Diverse’, 
that is, the minor it arian (ibid.: 62). Although 
his writ ings oft en evade an engage ment 
with tech no logy – or are overtly tech no-
phobic – newfound urgen cies arise to 
consider Glissant’s philo sophy of opacity 
within the context of tech nics in the early 
twenty- ﬁ rst century. Whether innov a tions 
in Big Data, secret data sweeps of govern-
mental surveil lance or the growing popular-
ity of the Quantiﬁ ed Self, the world’s people 
are increas ingly reduced to aggreg ates of 
pars able data. Alexander R. Galloway and 
Eugene Th acker have described this era as 
one of ‘univer sal stand ards of iden ti ﬁ c a tion’ 
( Galloway 
and 
Th acker 
2007 : 
131). 
Technologies such as biomet rics,  GPS , 
 RFID , data- mining algorithms, collab or at-
ive ﬁ lters,  DNA  and genom ics become 
oper a tional through global proto cols that 
aim to solve ‘today’s crises of locat ab il ity 
and iden ti ﬁ c a tion’, for govern ments, milit-
ar ies, corpor a tions, and indi vidu als alike 
(ibid.). Th ese iden ti ﬁ c a tion tech no lo gies 
gain ascend ence in a time of neolib er al ism, 
 I
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
IN-HUMAN, THE 
how opacity makes an ethical demand, as 
an appeal to prevent its denig ra tion. 
Importantly, this does not imply that 
opacity is a stasis or same ness that must be 
preserved; altern ately, it is the world 
without stand ard or norm – mater i al ity in 
dura tional ﬂ ux, which is the very aesthet ics 
of the Other, for Glissant. At once onto lo-
gical, ethical and aesthetic, Glissant contin-
ues to explain opacity as a polit ics: ‘if an 
opacity is the basis for a Legitimacy, this 
would be the sign of its having entered into 
a polit ical dimen sion . . . [Opacity] would 
be the real found a tion of Relation, in 
freedom’ ( Glissant 1997 : 194). A polit ics of 
opacity, then, estab lishes itself in contra-
dis tinc tion to state- based forms of legal 
recog ni tion, which neces sit ate the elim in a-
tion of ambi gu ity to obtain the rights of a 
free citizen. Uniﬁ ed as a philo soph ical 
concept, opacity provides a consist ency for 
minor it arian forces that are burdened by 
the norms of the day but can never be 
extin guished by them. 
 Informatic opacity starts with the 
premise that struggles for opacity occupy 
multiple perceptual and interpretive strata, 
notably because being opaque to a person 
is not the same as being opaque to a 
machine. Consider a drone: while a drone 
operator might not be able to locate a 
person with their own embodied senses, 
the thermal imaging system of the drone 
can achieve this via heat detection. Today, 
acts against global surveillance exhibit an 
immense investment in informatic opacity, 
from protest masks and cell phone signal 
jammers to online encryption. Although 
Glissant does not deﬁ ne opacity as tactical, 
such political techniques suggest that 
informatic opacity is a practice of anti- 
standardization at the global, technical 
scale. As a kind of ontological tactics, it is 
of and for the minoritarian, who are the 
most violently impacted by informatic 
identiﬁ cation 
standards: 
transgender 
persons are subjected to terrorist inspection 
when their bodies are misread by airport 
scanners and people of colour are proﬁ led 
by biometric technologies. Crucially, this 
reveals a crux of informatic opacity: it 
is both liberating and oppressive. As 
informatic identiﬁ cation is linked more and 
more to governance, mobility and freedom, 
becoming informatically opaque can have 
excruciating political consequences, such 
as the loss of basic human rights. In spite 
of this, informatic opacity makes a more 
utopian 
gesture 
to 
exist 
without 
identiﬁ cation. Yet, in doing so, it does not 
ask us to return to Glissant’s technophobia, 
but instead it oﬀ ers an inﬁ nitely more 
challenging and utopic proposition: to live 
with technologies that express the joy of 
opacity, not its destruction. 
 See also  Algorithmic Studies; Metadata 
Society; Hypersocial; Leaks and Stings. 
 Zach Blas 
 IN-HUMAN, THE  
 Donna Haraway radic al ized the postruc-
tur al ist thesis of the human as a construc-
tion by way of bring ing it to its constitutive 
dyad of the organic and the tech no lo gical, 
or of body and language. Th e dyad is 
aﬃ  rmed in its radical irre con cil ab il ity 
without the desire or the tend ency to 
resolve into a synthesis or a hier arch ical 
subsump tion. As the result of the radical 
aﬃ  rm a tion of the dyad an unname able 
remainder occurs which keeps invit ing us 
to under stand it and tame it through 
meaning – the inhuman. 
 Th e inhuman is an idea very close to 
Laruelle’s concept of the ‘human- in-
human’ or what I will term here as the ‘non- 
human’. It is non- human insofar as it is 
non- human ist, and, more radic ally, insofar
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
IN-HUMAN, THE
as it makes no sense in the philo soph ical or 
theo lo gical terms. It precedes its meaning. 
Yet again, it also prompts it. It neces sit ates 
and engenders the auto- refer en tial process 
of ‘making sense out of it.’ Th e pre- lingual 
self which is the ‘real’ under the ‘ﬁ rst name 
of the lived’ (Laruelle) or the human- in-
human nesting at the heart of all subjectiv-
ity neces sit ates its self- estrange ment and 
linguistic medi ation as its means. Th e ﬁ gure 
of the ‘Stranger’ is thus born. Th e Stranger 
(also a term borrowed from Laruelle’s non- 
analyt ical vocab u lary) is the posture of the 
lived that is proto- linguistic, and it refers to 
the prim it ive self- estrange ment preﬁ g ur ing 
subjectiv ity ( Laruelle 1995 : 78). Subjectivity 
is the philo soph ical Self. It is of the ‘World’ 
which, accord ing to non- philo sophy or the 
non- stand ard philo sophy, is synonym ous 
to ‘Philosophy’ ( Laruelle 1989 : 53, 58, 61). 
Th e real, albeit indiﬀ er ent to the processes 
of ‘making sense’ or thought, neces sit ates 
those very processes, brings about their 
traject or ies. 
 Th e thought there fore acts unilat er ally: 
it correl ates with the eﬀ ects of the real 
whereas the real, inas much as it is a singu-
lar ity, remains radic ally indiﬀ er ent to it and 
diﬀ er ent from it. For example, the trauma 
prompts its own tran scend ence through 
neur osis but the latter acts unilat er ally with 
respect to it. Th e trauma itself remains 
outside the ﬁ eld of ‘what makes sense’ as 
the symptom precedes the neur otic 
response. Th e real mani fests itself as the 
Lacanian symptom or as trauma which 
comes about as the  tuché vis-à- vis the auto-
maton (Aristotle). It produces a struc ture 
of occur rences governed by internal laws, a 
‘syntax’ of a sort ( Kolozova 2014 : 63). 
 Transcendence is neces sary. Nonetheless, 
it can be carried out philo soph ic ally or non- 
philo soph ic ally. Th e latter refers to oper a-
tions (of thought) with philo soph ical 
mater ial which succumb to diktat of the 
real rather than to a cosmo logy of thought 
or a doctrine. Regardless of the posture 
of thought (be it philo soph ical or non- 
philo soph ical, or scientiﬁ c), there will 
always be a remainder of the unruly and 
sense less real at the heart of what seems to 
be a ‘mean ing ful reality’, one domest ic ated 
through a subjectiv ity.  Th at which escapes 
sense, the trail of the monstrous real is the 
inhuman at the heart of the human. It is 
neither natural nor tech no lo gical, it precedes 
the distinc tion – it is non- human or inhuman . 
 A cyborg, an animal or the dark- out-
there which can never be reduced to a 
meaning or truth, that which escapes 
philo sophy or trans form a tion into ‘what 
makes sense’ is inhuman or monstrous. 
Humanity is a theo lo gico- philo soph ical 
creation and it is always natur al ized. Th e 
same goes for the nature: thanks to philo-
sophy, it has always been human ized. 
Th erefore, as long as the tech no lo gical 
compon ent of the radical dyad called the 
Cyborg (Haraway) can be human ized, it is 
neither monstrous nor inhuman. If it can 
be ration ally grasped, if it can be ration al-
ized or make sense accord ing to the 
anthro po centric reason, it can be and will 
unavoid ably be human ized. Moreover, it 
will be natur al ized. Th e inhuman is that 
which escapes ration al iz a tion, that which 
has no meaning or reason for exist ence. It 
is just out there – sense less, brute exist ence, 
matter regard less of whether organic or 
arti ﬁ  cially produced. Th e tech no lo gical 
pros thesis and the biolo gical body are both 
alien to the subjectiv ity we believe exhausts 
our ‘true self’. Th ey are both equally 
inhuman as is the prim it ive conﬁ g ur a tion 
of subjectiv ity – or the protosub jectiv ity – 
we called above ‘the Stranger’. 
 Contemporary capit al ism is enabled by 
the abso lute rule of pure spec u la tion over 
the phys ical or the mater ial (regard less 
of whether organic or synthet ic ally 
produced), mater i al ized as surplus value, 
i.e. as the fetish called ‘money’. Wage labour,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
IN/HUMAN 
from the species- being take place as the 
result of the exploit a tion of the inhuman 
on the part of the self- suﬃ   cient auto mated 
spec u la tion. In the Capitalocene, the 
inhuman consti tutes the global concen tra-
tion camp for the female, the animal, the 
black and the body that labours for wage 
or is exploited for the produc tion of a 
commod ity. 
 See also Animal; Ahuman; Anthropocene; 
Capitalocene 
and 
Chthulucene; 
In/
Human. 
 Katerina Kolozova 
 IN/HUMAN  
 Unlike the condi tion of the posthu man, 
which mainly implies an irre vers ible evol u-
tion ary trans ition to the geolo gical time of 
the Anthropocene, the concept of the in-
human presup poses alter hu man agen cies 
and pres ences paral lel to human exist ence. 
Th e posthu man condi tion posits man as 
an obsol ete phenomenon of deep history 
and geolo gical time, whereas the condi tion 
of the inhuman enables one to determ ine 
the limits of the human mind within both 
human and posthu man agen cies. 
 As a matter of fact, the birth of 
Renaissance human ism was not so much 
about the narciss istic adher ence of human-
kind to itself, but rather about the secu lar-
ized mind that had to remain without once 
guar an teed non- human comple ments to 
life: myth o logy, faith, mysti cism, reli gion, 
God, eternal life. It was actu ally due to the 
secu lar ized claim to be merely human that 
it became possible to actu ally exper i ence 
the uncanny burden of remain ing human 
in an inhuman envir on ment: all those 
spheres of the non- human ness that had 
hitherto patron ized human ity – cosmos, 
nature, universe – were disen chanted and 
ration al ized. In this case the mind that 
claimed its new sover eign ration al ity not 
only asser ted its limits, but real ized its 
ground less ness, doom to death and extinc-
tion; whereas earlier all inhuman compon-
ents cooper ated with human ity as the 
mystic cosmic ‘home’. In other words, it was 
with human ism that the dimen sion of the 
agency of the inhuman mani fes ted itself as 
utterly alien. 
 In German ideal ism, never the less, these 
alien, inhuman compon ents were not 
treated as ungrasp able for the human 
mind. On the contrary, even for Kant the 
human mind remained a tool for extend-
ing oneself to such uncom fort able, alien-
ated other ness. Kant’s notion of the 
sublime or the thing- in-itself implied the 
inca pa city of human cogni tion to exceed 
human 
conscious ness. 
However, 
this 
‘beyond’ was imagined as the human 
mind’s regu lat ive idea about the broader 
inhuman mind. 
 Even more so in Hegel; for him the 
inhuman (abso lute) mind exists; yet 
human think ing is able to develop to the 
 niveau , where it reaches this univer sal 
inhuman mind without ceasing to be 
human. As Evald Ilyenkov states in his 
‘Cosmology of Mind’, it was Hegel who 
tried to solve the problem of the over
(in)human mind: human thought was 
considered capable to cognize accord ing to 
the laws of abso lute mind ( Ilyenkov 1991 ). 
According to such logic, the fact that the 
human mind can infer the exist ence of a 
broader cognit ive capa city and a mind 
supreme to it only conﬁ rms that this infer-
ence of the inhuman belongs to the human 
mind per se and there is nothing that 
excels over it or exceeds it. Despite having 
limit a tions the human mind remains the 
only agency of the quest for the abso lute. If 
it were not so, one would have to allege the 
neces sity of super nat ural spirits, gods,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
IN/HUMAN
divine real it ies, etc. Hence, the syndrome 
of the alien discon nec ted and uncor rel ated 
with human subjectiv ity inev it ably returns 
back to theo logy or some sort of techno- 
panthe ism. 
 Ray Brassier provides a completely 
converse treat ment of the dialectic of the 
human ness and inhu man ness of mind. 
According to him the tran scend ental 
subject and thought can only be non- 
anthro po lo gical, alien, extra ter restrial and 
inhuman ( Brassier 2001 ). An excel lent 
example of such a stance in art was 
Karlheinz Stockhausen. He believed that 
his music was incom pre hens ible to the 
human ear and hence completely inhuman, 
since the human species is ascend ing to a 
new cognit ive turn, presup pos ing enhanced 
intel li gence and percep tion; this would split 
human kind evol u tion ally into those with 
higher sapient cognit ive skills and those 
with the lower sentient and repro duct ive 
needs. 
 Speculative realist, accel er a tion ist and 
object- oriented theor ies go even further in 
this direc tion. For them inhu man ist univer-
sal ism in the history of thought is only a 
false projec tion of a ﬁ nite human mind. 
Th e history of human ity, its mater ial culture 
and the history of human thought can be 
no more than a tiny episode in the life of 
the universe, and thought can only serve to 
myth o lo gize what a really autonom ous 
inhuman know ledge might be. Intelligence 
has the attrib utes of the human mind, but 
its proced ures of cogni tion and intel lect 
should be extern al ized and nomin al ized 
beyond the domain of the human brain 
and mind. 
 In other words the contem por ary 
debate about inhuman agen cies rejects its 
philo soph ical back ground to posit the 
issue of the inhuman not so much as one of 
mind, but rather as an autonom ous 
inhuman intel li gence, even though it might 
occur in a nomin ally human body or 
society. It is obvious, too, that various 
mani fest a tions of machinic intel li gences, 
compu ta tional sciences and, more broadly, 
the infra struc ture of cognit ive capital 
exceed the capa cit ies of human mind and 
human life. Contemporary condi tions of 
economy, milit ary tech no logy and media 
are oper ated by such arti ﬁ  cial abstrac tions 
and non- human agen cies. Th erefore, it is 
import ant in this connec tion to prove 
that exper i ments with neuro physiology 
demon strate that the human brain itself 
contains elements of arti ﬁ  cial non- human 
intel li gence and compu ta tion. An import-
ant argu ment in the apology for algorithmic 
and cyber netic intel li gence is that compu-
ta tion is not at all an auto maton of inform-
a tion and calcu la tion, but includes in itself 
gaps, traumas, para doxes and incom put-
able condi tions ( Parisi 2013a ). Th ereby the 
debate on the inhuman does not claim any 
expir a tion of the human. What it insists on 
is that tech no lo gical excel lence, contem-
por ary cognit ive produc tion and the capa-
cit ies of the human mind in its non- correl-
a tional autonomy are much more similar 
to arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence than to what the 
human mind appeared to be in history or 
philo sophy. 
 Such treat ment of the inhuman is not 
preoc cu pied with the dialect ical inter sec-
tion of the human and the inhuman, i.e. by 
the inquiry into the extent the indi vidual 
human mind can extend itself towards 
some thing cognit ively supreme. Along 
with excel lence of the mind, exceed ing the 
human condi tion, theor ies of autonom ous 
intel li gence rather insist on the overall 
recon sid er a tion of the mind as an inhuman 
capa city ( Pasquinelli 2015a ). Th ey search 
within the mind, human as it is, for a neural 
func tion that would be alien, non- human 
and would have no cognit ive continu ity 
with the dimen sion of mind inscribed into 
human exper i ence, conscious ness, history, 
etc. Such func tions of intel li gence might
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
IN/HUMAN 
leads to the asser tion that within think ing, 
science, tech no logy, the economy and soci-
etal infra struc ture there has always existed 
a consid er able compon ent of alien intel li-
gence, and what had always been import-
ant in philo sophy, mind or thought had 
rather been char ac ter istic for the arti ﬁ  cial 
non- human intel li gences, than a thought 
as a tran scend ental, philo soph ical and crit-
ical oper a tion ( Negarestani 2015 ). 
 Such abstract, autonom ous intel li gence 
needs no conscious ness. In other words the 
point is not that some thing that used to be 
human should trans form into some thing 
more radical and developed, but that s/he 
should re- assess itself as the inhuman with 
all its back ground – past, present and future. 
Referring to Alan Turing, Negarestani 
claims that there is nothing in the human 
that could not be abstrac ted and compu ta-
tion ally real ized (ibid.). Moreover, what is 
considered to be ‘a human mind’ is a func-
tion open for future recon sti t u tion, which 
means that the modes of real iz a tion of 
mind can be super seded by certain func-
tions of intel li gence that might have 
changed the type of human intel li gence 
alto gether. Not only is a human able to 
become other in the long run of evol u tion, 
but it is able to regard its human- ness as 
other than a human. Being a human it 
never the less is able to termin ate to see itself 
as human. 
 According to Negarestani, ‘Turing’s 
thesis on the compu ta tional func tional 
real iz ab il ity of the human mind . . . 
suggests there is no essen tial ist limit to the 
recon struct ab il ity of the human or what 
human signi ﬁ c ance consists in’ (ibid.: 152). 
 What is valu able in this infer ence is that 
it directs the agenda of the human towards 
the indeﬁ n ite future, opening up versat ile 
devel op mental and eman cip at ory poten ti-
al it ies. On the other hand, such futur ist ic-
ally opened poten ti al it ies imply that: 
 1. Mind can only be deﬁ ned as intel li gence 
real ized via machinic, algorithmic para-
met ers, i.e. it is inhuman by deﬁ n i tion.  
 2. Which leads to the second asser tion, 
namely, that eman cip a tion is mainly an 
inhuman poten ti al ity. 
 Th us, the inhuman is not merely some 
alien intel li gence paral lel to the human 
one; rather, human intel li gence itself must 
be recon sidered as alien and altern at ive to 
its own previ ous histor ic ally biased implic-
a tions. However, what is taken for granted 
here is that the devel op ment and expan-
sion of mind can only occur due to over-
com ing the mind’s human condi tion. 
Hence machinic and algorithmic intel li-
gence becomes a new irre vers ible mode of 
mind’s capa city; but as well, the trans form-
a tion of thought into algorith mic ally 
groun ded intel li gences marks the inev it-
able obsol es cence of what crit ical thought 
used to be in the long run of history. So 
that the inhuman arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence is 
considered as a func tion ‘augmen ted’ and 
supreme with regard to thought and mind. 
 But what if mind is not just a cognit ive 
category, whose autonom ous func tion is 
intel li gence? What if intel li gence is only a 
small part of the mind’s capa city? In this 
case, the augment a tion of intel li gence 
would not presup pose sublat ing human 
mind, nor would it imply conﬁ n ing mind 
to neural func tions. Th e issue of the human 
is about sapi ence to the extent that sapi-
ence as mind is not about just intel li gence 
and its excel lence. Is not there fore the 
notion of augmen ted intel li gence closer to 
Hegel’s Understanding, intel lect ( Verstand ) 
than reason ( Vernunft  )? It is exactly intel-
lect ( Verstand ) that deals with form al iz a-
tion, system at iz ing, abstract ing; whereas 
reason over comes abstrac tion to achieve 
the concrete ness of the notion. Intellect 
and Understanding are nominal and 
abstract; reason is concrete and general.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
know ledge, exceed ing the limited human 
mind; rather, it is about human mind being 
assembled out of social rela tions and the 
diachron icity of labour, i.e. it is general due 
to broadly non- self being of humans in 
social context. 
 Human mind, along with cogni tion, is 
there fore not merely a gnos eo lo gical func-
tion. Knowledge emerges along with 
suﬀ er ing from non- under stand ing, with 
the aware ness of mortal ity, just as cogni-
tion is not worth while without the ethic-
ally biased deed. 
 See also  AI (Artiﬁ cial Intelligence); 
Computational Turn; In-Human; Monster/
Th e Unhuman; Non- human Agency; 
Violence. 
 Keti Chukhrov 
 INSURGENT POSTHUMANISM  
 Can we think of a posthu man ism that is 
expli citly polit ical and is coex ist ent with 
social move ments? Such insur gent posthu-
man ism would not only redraw the theor-
et ical contours of posthu man ism itself but 
also ques tion the ﬁ xa tion of many social 
move ments on the state and polit ical 
power in order to uncover traverse histor-
ies of non- human ist struggles within them. 
One can trace these struggles back to the 
exodus of labour ers from inden tured, 
forced work and slavery. Th e singu lar it ies 
that composed the escap ing, wander ing 
mob were far from the human ist indi-
vidual emer ging in Europe and spread ing 
across the world through colo nial expan-
sion; they were much closer to the nonhu-
man ist pleb cross ing the coun tryside and 
the high seas from the mid-four teenth and 
ﬁ ft eenth centur ies and, later, to the 
disorderly mobs popu lat ing the streets of 
the cities in the eight eenth and nine teenth 
centur ies ( Papadopoulos, Stephenson and 
Tsianos 2008 ). 
 Many of these scattered insur gent 
move ments of people did not enter the 
nascent capit al ist human ist regime of 
labour but created non- propri et ary and 
non- enclosed worlds through ‘common-
ing’ ( Linebaugh 2008 ) matter and the 
mater ial world, the land and soil, plants 
and animals. Th e reas sembling of the state 
as a secular, liberal and human ist insti tu-
tion and the estab lish ment of capit al ist 
rela tions of employ ment was a response to 
these non- human ist struggles. Th ere was 
no histor ical neces sity for this reor gan iz a-
tion of the state other than the insur gency 
of these non- human ist move ments that 
force pre- capit al ist and proto- capit al ist 
social organ iz a tion to collapse ( Moulier 
Boutang 1998 ). 
 Th e 
exper i ment a tion 
with 
novel 
embod ied prac tices and altern at ive ways 
of being remain at the core of these move-
ments. For example, in the 1960s and 1970s 
we can see the resur fa cing of such non- 
human ist polit ics which can be now called 
posthu man ist: they attempt to depart from 
and chal lenge the by- then long- estab lished 
domin a tion of human ist polit ics. Rather 
than a direct confront a tion with state 
power and estab lished polit ics many of 
these femin ist, envir on mental, anti racist, 
sexual, coun ter cul tural move ments put 
forward altern at ive ways of every day life 
that chal lenge power by their very own 
pres ence. Instead of the ﬁ xa tion on the 
ﬁ del ity to an event to come that will over-
come current polit ical power the mundane 
polit ics of these move ments grav it ate 
around the joy of putting together a whole 
cosmos around every day radical mater ial 
prac tices ( Bakhtin 1984 ). With Anzaldua 
( 1987 ) – and I am think ing here also of 
Frantz Fanon, Edouard Glissant, Jose
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INSURGENT POSTHUMANISM 
Martí, Oswald de Andrade and many 
others – we see how radical change passes 
through the posthu man ist trans form a tion 
of the mater i al ity and socio- ecolo gical 
rela tion al ity of the body ( Braidotti 2002 ). 
 As these posthu man ist move ments of 
the 1960s and aft er were gradu ally 
absorbed into the emer ging neolib eral 
transna tional governance they came to be 
called New Social Movements ( NSM s). 
And, indeed, those which weren’t already 
‘social’ became social in the way we 
commonly use the adject ive today: they 
turned primar ily to ques tions of iden tity, 
repres ent a tion 
and 
rights, 
polit ical 
governance and the account ab il ity of the 
state. With this change insur gent posthu-
man ist polit ics declined again, only to 
reappear in the wave of social mobil iz a-
tions that erupted at the begin ning of the 
twenty- ﬁ rst century and in partic u lar 
during the 2008 to 2013 cycle of social 
unrest. 
 What if social move ments action today 
is not just target ing exist ing polit ical power 
but is also exper i ment ing with worlds and 
the mater i al ity of life? Many current move-
ments engage directly with tech nos cience 
and mater ial/ecolo gical exper i ment a tion; 
they immerse into the human–non- human 
continuum and change society by enga ging 
with both the human and the non- human 
world ( Haraway 1997 ). Social move ments 
start to become more than social, move-
ments of matter and the social simul tan-
eously, move ments that change power by 
creat ing altern at ive forms of life that cannot 
be neglected by insti tuted polit ics. 
 Traditionally this power to create 
condi tions that cannot be neglected or 
bypassed has always involved the ques tion 
of viol ence. Against the purpor ted tight 
artic u la tion of viol ence and trans form a-
tion (primar ily as protest viol ence against 
the state), domin ant liberal human ist 
think ing asserts that viol ence starts where 
polit ics stops. Is it possible to escape the 
dicho tomy that opposes the viol ence of 
protest to the oppres sion of the state? Is it 
possible to commit to the funda mental 
possib il ity of non- viol ence, and simul tan-
eously promote justice and create altern at-
ive ways of exist ence? 
 For more than social move ments the 
ques tion of justice is a ques tion of tempor-
al ity: justice is now, justice is against defer-
ral; the space of defer ral is the space of 
destruct ive viol ence. A posthu man reading 
of Benjamin’s  Critique of Violence (1996) 
would see justice worlded through the re- 
appro pri ation of matter and the imme di-
ate making of altern at ive forms of life. 
Paradoxically this is the end of any form of 
viol ence, social or indi vidual. Th e more 
justice is concrete and mater ial, the more 
non- violent and collect ive it is. Th is is 
post an thro po centric history: it is not made 
through the eternal dialect ical struggle 
between 
constitu ent 
and 
consti tuted 
power; rather, history is made with and 
outside of the history of society, it is made 
when justice is restored mater i ally – a 
posthu man justice, the co- construc tion of 
just forms of life with other species and 
things. 
 Th e central ques tion facing more than 
social move ments is how this commit ment 
to justice can address the radical asym -
 met ries which pervade our human and non-
 hu man worlds. Symmetry is not enough to 
reverse the modern puri ﬁ c a tion of humans 
and non- humans ( Latour 1993 ) and to 
stop impos ing our ‘we’ – humans – on 
‘them’ – non- humans. We have never been 
modern not because the modern puri ﬁ c a-
tion is impossible but because we have 
never been ‘we’ and they – the non- humans 
– have never been ‘they’. Th e consti tu tion 
of modern ity is based on a set of univer sal-
isms that have their proven ance in colo nial 
expan sion ism and the spread of the colo-
nial matrix ( Quijano 2007 ).
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
( Mignolo and Escobar 2010 ). More than 
social move ments encounter the ques tion 
whether there is a ‘one- world world’ ( Law 
2015 ) or a pluri verse of words ( de la 
Cadena 2015 ) as a prac tical problem: they 
engage in a continu ous mater i al ism, that is 
they start from what exists to create other 
worlds that escape exist ing ones. Zapatista’s 
matrix of a ‘world where many worlds ﬁ t’ is 
neither an epistem o lo gical issue nor a plea 
for chan ging our world view to acknow-
ledge the exist ence of multiple worlds; it 
is a guid ance for prac tice and an invit a tion 
to a move ment. Neither the making of 
one single onto logy nor the making of 
multiple onto lo gies, but groun ded making: 
from alter- glob al iz a tion to alter- onto lo gies. 
From epistem o logy to onto logy to move-
ment. If there are ‘plural ways of being in 
the world’ ( Chakrabarty 2000 ) then more 
than social move ments give birth to plural 
ways of making the world; they give birth 
to indi gen ous onto lo gies ( Blaser 2012 ). 
Th ese onto lo gies can only come into being 
as they discon nect from the Western 
temporal register that releg ates indi gen ous 
worlds to the past and set up autonom ous 
indi gen ous onto lo gies – be it inside or 
outside the Western space. 
 Autonomy here is, of course, not meant 
as the modern ist human ist value of indi-
vidual inde pend ence but as polit ical 
autonomy which requires mater ial inter-
con nec ted ness and intens ive onto lo gical 
alli ances. And these are always more than 
human ( Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ), they 
always 
involve 
exper i ment a tion. 
Th e 
exper i mental polit ics ( Papadopoulos 2017 ) 
of more than social move ments is about 
inven tion – not the indi vidual achieve ment 
of exper i mental science but distrib uted 
inven tion power: dispersed exper i ment a-
tion in the continuum of tech nos cience 
and every day life, the prolif er a tion of 
distrib uted ‘cooper a tion without consensus’ 
( Star 1993 ), the topo lo gical stack ing of 
mater i als and processes, ecolo gical trans-
vers al ity between diﬀ er ent social and 
mater ial registers, complex traﬃ  c between 
insti tuted and community tech nos cience, 
the ‘invol u tion’ ( Hustak and Myers 2013 ) of 
human, animal and inor ganic actors, the 
cent ral ity of craft , the continu ous folding 
of the commons and the private and public 
spheres into each other, the creation of 
gener ous infra struc tures and infra struc-
tural imagin a tion, the cultiv a tion of 
mater ial liter acy, the prolif er a tion of 
‘exper i mental labour’ ( Kortright 2013 ), 
community tech nos cience and indi gen ous 
know ledge prac tices. 
 Distributed inven tion power char ac ter-
izes the trans ition from the inform a tion 
age (note: big data is only a sign of peak 
digit iz a tion) to the time of compos i tion. 
Experimental polit ics is about the compos-
i tion of the digital and the mater ial, wet 
and dry, matter and code; it is about 
forming mater ial alli ances through the 
asso ci ation, mutu al ism and artic u la tion 
between not directly connec ted forms of 
life. Endosymbiosis instead of endo col on-
iz a tion. Cooperation instead of toxicity. 
Warm 
compost 
instead 
of 
acidity. 
Commensality instead of contam in a tion. 
‘Material spir itu al ity’ ( Puig de la Bellacasa 
2014 ) instead of instru ment al ity. Ultimately 
exper i mental polit ics revolve around care 
as an ‘ethopoi et ical prac tice’, the simul tan-
eous produc tion of ethos and onto logy 
( Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ). More than 
social move ments fork worlds into altern-
at ive onto lo gies: one always relies on what 
existed before and then you split, redir ect. 
Innovation happens rarely through sudden 
novelty and more through hacking, stretch-
ing, knit ting, craft  ing, weaving, tweak ing, 
mending, recom bin ing exist ing processes 
or substances. What is at stake in the
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INTEREST/INTERESSE 
of life, the creation of commensal worlds. 
More than social move ments are world 
movers. 
 See also Critical Posthumanism; Commons, 
the; Geo-Hydro-Solar-Bio-Techno-Politics; 
Political 
Aﬀ ect; 
Posthuman 
Critical 
Th eory. 
 Dimitris Papadopoulos 
 INTEREST/INTERESSE  
 Th e focus of this contri bu tion is a sketch of 
the concep tual contours of a rela tional 
philo sophy that comes to the fore by 
combin ing a variety of twen ti eth- century 
philo soph ical 
perspect ives. 
Relational 
philo sophy reaches beyond meta phys ics 
and subject philo soph ical perspect ives, 
aﬃ  rm ing Nietzschean revalu ation of all 
values, instan ti at ing an aﬃ  rm at ive nihil ism. 
In that sense it is a posthu man perspect ive. 
In them at iz ing an aﬀ ect onto lo gical 
perspect ive, acknow ledging the consti tut ing 
power of the in- between ness of medi at iz a-
tion (see  Radical Mediocrity ) it also reaches 
beyond modern man- and male- centred 
indi vidu al ism in a transhuman way. 
Th erefore the core concept of a philo sophy 
of rela tions is the notion of  interesse : being 
inter ested, liter ally being ( esse ) in- between 
( inter ) as the core of a rela tional perspect ive. 
Psychologically being inter ested indic ates 
an atti tude of open ness without anti cip a tion 
emphas iz ing the quality of inter act ing over 
the instru ment al iz a tion of the commu nic a-
tion for external goals. Philosophically 
 interesse connotes the onto lo gical primacy 
of the in- between, i.e. of rela tions. In aesthet-
ics the rela tional turn is claimed by Nicolas 
Bourriaud. Th e concept of a ‘rela tional 
aesthet ics’ under pins the events in Palais de 
Tokyo in Paris. In  Relational Aesthetics 
Bourriaud deﬁ nes this museal event as ‘a set 
of artistic prac tices which take as their 
theor et ical and prac tical point of depar ture 
the whole of human rela tions and their 
social context, rather than an inde pend ent 
and private space’ (2002: xv). While 
Bourriaud in the 1990s was trans form ing 
the space of the museum into an inter act ive 
rela tional rhizome, to ﬁ gure a certain visi -
b il ity in these rela tions, the Canadian–
Mexican artist Rafael Lozano-Hemmer 
inter venes in public space with his dynamic 
inter act ive install a tions, calling his work 
‘rela tional archi tec ture’. 
 Th e concept of  interesse is the philo-
soph ical coun ter part of this ‘rela tional turn’ 
in art and design. As a philo soph ical notion 
it is intro duced into modern discourse by 
Martin Heidegger. In  Being and Time 
(1927) he states that ‘Dasein  is the being of 
this “between”.’ But he warns his readers not 
to make the mistake of under stand ing this 
constitutive in- between ( Zwischen ) ‘as the 
result of the  conveni en tia of two object ively 
present things’ ( DATE : 124). Th e in- 
between precedes any posi tion. In  What is 
called Th inking?  (1954) in- between is reph-
rased as ‘Interesse’: ‘being with and between 
the things, being in between and endur ing 
this’. However, ‘nowadays “Interesse” deals 
with what is inter est ing. Something that 
enables someone to be indiﬀ er ent the next 
moment, some thing that is followed by 
some thing else that is as indiﬀ er ent as what 
preceded it’ (122). I coined this in another 
lemma: radical mediocrity. So Heidegger 
makes a distinc tion between an inau-
thentic, ephem eral condi tion of the inter-
est ing as shallow enter tain ment and a 
funda mental being- in- between ( Zwischen- 
sein ) as the ‘cement’ ( Kit ) of rela tion al ity or 
Being- with ( Mit- sein ). In a rela tional philo-
soph ical context  interesse goes beyond 
shared interests and excludes indiﬀ er ence.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
INTEREST/INTERESSE
Interesse is the aﬃ  rm at ive coun ter part of 
an uncrit ical radical mediocrity. 
 Th e concept is adopted and adapted by 
one of Heidegger’s former students: 
Hannah Arendt. In her American public a-
tions the German notion  Interesse is trans-
lated as ‘interest’, giving the concept a 
speciﬁ c economic and polit ical twist. In 
 Th e Human Condition  (1958) Arendt takes 
Heidegger’s distinc tion one step further, 
politi ciz ing Heidegger’s onto lo gical notion 
of language as the House of Being: 
 Th ese interests consti tute, in the word’s 
most 
literal 
signi ﬁ c ance, 
some thing 
which inter- est, which lies between people 
and there fore can relate and bind them 
together. Most action and speech is 
concerned with this in- between, which 
varies with each group of people, so that 
most words and deeds are about some 
worldly object ive reality in addi tion to 
being a disclos ure of the acting and 
speak ing agent. 
 Arendt 1998 : 182 
 In  Eurotaoism  (1989) Peter Sloterdijk 
addresses this shift  from Heidegger’s 
male- domin ated nega tion of life – ‘Being- 
toward-Death’ – to Arendt’s female- 
oriented, open atti tude of ‘natal ity’: a 
coming- into-world 
( zur-Welt- kommen ) 
that includes both bi- unity and creativ ity. 
(205) In his  Spheres trilogy Sloterdijk 
concludes in  Spheres III: Foams that an 
uncrit ical  interesse asks for ‘the combin a-
tion of “de- inter est ing and re- inter est ing” 
in a nondual type of morals’ (2004: n. 332). 
 In emphas iz ing the supple ment ary 
tension between ‘de- inter est ing and re- 
inter est ing’ Sloterdijk refers to the rhizo-
matic philo sophy of Deleuze and Guattari. 
At the end of the preface to  A Th ousand 
Plateaus on the rhizome the French philo-
soph ers circum scribe the onto lo gical mode 
of this in- between: ‘Th e middle is by no 
means an average . . . Between things does 
not desig nate a local iz able rela tion going 
from one thing to the other and back again, 
but a perpen dic u lar direc tion, a trans versal 
move ment that sweeps one and the other 
away, a stream without begin ning or end 
that under mines its banks and picks up 
speed in the middle’ (1980: 25). ‘Inter’ is a 
herit age of French philo soph ers of diﬀ er-
ence. Over the last decades of the twen ti eth 
century the emphasis in their work gradu-
ally shift ed from diﬀ er ence to the in- 
between or ‘inter’. Th is trans ition is already 
meth od o lo gic ally explored in Derrida’s 
 Of Grammatology  (1967): ‘Immediacy is 
derived’; ‘that all begins through the inter-
me di ary is what indeed is “incon ceiv able” ’ 
(1976: 157). In  Margins of Philosophy (1972) 
 diﬀ érance  is presen ted as an ‘inter val’: 
 neither simply active nor simply passive, 
announ cing or rather recall ing some thing 
like the middle voice saying an oper a tion 
that is not an oper a tion, an oper a tion that 
cannot be conceived either as passion or 
as the action of a subject on an object, 
or on the basis of the categor ies of agent 
or patient neither on the basis of nor 
moving toward any of these  terms . 
 1972: 9 
 Derrida’s crucial notions reson ate in (con)
texts of Jean-François Lyotard, Michel 
Foucault, Luce Irigaray, Gilles Deleuze and 
Félix Guattari. All of these notions are 
instru mental to draw the contours of a 
philo sophy of rela tions. 
 Th e initial focus of philo sophies of 
diﬀ er ence is an onto lo gical primacy of 
several modal it ies of diﬀ er ence developed 
in the course of the 1960s and 1970s: 
diﬀ er ence 
(Derrida), 
the 
Diﬀ erend 
(Lyotard), sexual diﬀ er ence (Irigaray), the 
Other (Foucault), desir ing machines and 
the schizo (Deleuze/Guattari). Th is is the 
back bone of a rela tional philo sophy for 
the twenty- ﬁ rst century. But this is already 
preﬁ gured in an earlier critique on the
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INTEREST/INTERESSE 
whom Paul Ricoeur labels as the ‘masters 
of 
suspi cion’: 
Karl 
Marx, 
Friedrich 
Nietzsche and Sigmund Freud. Th ese are 
the canon ical thinkers that drove the 
autonom ous subject, resid ing in the centre 
of Immanuel Kant’s philo soph ical universe, 
out of the centre of philo soph ical thought. 
In Marx’s, Nietzsche’s and Freud’s critique 
the subject turns out to be the result of 
respect ively politico- econom ical forces 
and power rela tions, of rivalling vital forces 
and of libid inal ener gies. From a meta-
phys ical point of view it addresses no 
thing, nothing. In preced ing the subject 
Labour, Life and Libido are instances of the 
nihil ism Nietzsche diagnosed. In a more 
soci olo gical phras ing self- conscious ness 
is embed ded as a node in networks 
nowadays. In the ﬁ nal analysis these 
infra struc tural forces have and are no 
meta phys ical found a tion. 
 Next to these inspir a tions three other 
‘negat ive’ inspir a tions have to be taken into 
account when it comes to a trans ition from 
diﬀ er ence- based subject critique to a 
philo sophy of rela tions: Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich Hegel, the found ing father of 
modern dialectics, Ferdinand de Saussure, 
the found ing father of struc tur al ism, and 
the found ing father of a philo sophy of 
death, Martin Heidegger. All the above- 
mentioned philo soph ers of diﬀ er ence 
one way or the other had to get even 
with Hegel’s dialectics, incor por ated and 
surpassed De Saussure’s struc tur al ism in 
their discurs ive decon struc tion, gene a logy 
or rhizo mat ics and had to re- adjust 
Heideggerian thought on a Nietzschean- 
inspired philo sophy of life. As Heinz 
Kimmerle system at ic ally described, the 
decon struc tion of the Hegelian system by 
French philo soph ers led to the liber a tion 
of the rela tional found a tion of Hegelian 
dialectics. In  Entwurf einer Philosophie 
des Wir: Schule des altern at iven Denkens 
(1983) Kimmerle system at ic ally sketches 
the trans ition of Hegelian dialectics to a 
philo sophy of diﬀ er ence. Hegel’s system is 
beheaded, i.e. the diﬀ er ing of subla tion is 
radic al ized. Th e entwine ment of diﬀ er-
ences that is liber ated beyond dialect ical 
oppos i tion and nega tion is liter ally radic-
al ized (Latin:  radix = root) in the rhizo-
mat ics of Deleuze and Guattari. 
 Relation is the core char ac ter istic of 
De Saussure’s struc tur al ist semi ology. 
Meaning is no longer estab lished by refer-
ring to a state of aﬀ airs in the world, nor is 
signi ﬁ c a tion the result of an inten tional 
self- conscious ness. Language is mapped as 
an imman ent system of signs in which 
signi ﬁ c a tion results from the graft  ing of 
concepts onto graph emes or phon emes, i.e. 
onto writing or sounds. Only the posit ive 
rela tions between prin cip ally arbit rary 
linguistic elements produce meaning. In 
relat ing to, diﬀ er ing from and negat ing 
each other signs imman ently produce 
meaning. Th is decon struc tion of the 
subject is deepened by French thinkers 
who combine struc tur al ism with other 
human science discip lines. Jacques Lacan 
combined linguistic struc tur al ism with 
Freudian psycho ana lysis, Louis Althusser 
graft ed struc tur al ism onto Marxism, and 
Roland Barthes elab or ated the notion of 
sign, apply ing it to all cultural expres sions, 
trans form ing De Saussure’s semi ology into 
a general semi ot ics. 
 In line with the afore men tioned philo-
soph ers, over the past twenty years a philo-
sophy of rela tions has been artic u lated 
from diﬀ er ent perspect ives into diﬀ er ent 
direc tions by – among others – Bruno 
Latour, Isabelle Stengers and recently 
Bernard Stiegler. But the most radical and 
system atic approach is given by Jean-Luc 
Nancy. His work bears witness to a rela-
tional onto logy that revalu ates Nietzschean 
nihil ism in rethink ing the uncon ceiv-
able ‘inter’ of Derrida with notion as
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
being- in-common, being- with, being- in- 
between. In  Being Singular Plural (1996) 
Nancy over rules Heidegger’s state ment on 
Interesse: 
 Everything, then, passes  between us. Th is 
‘between’, as its name implies, has neither 
a consist ency nor continu ity of its own. It 
does not lead from one to the other . . . It 
is neither connec ted nor uncon nec ted . . . 
It is that which is at the heart of a connec-
tion, the  inter lacing of strands whose 
extremit ies remain separ ate even at the 
very centre of the knot. 
 Fully in accord with a philo sophy of diﬀ er-
ence ‘the law of touch ing is separ a tion’ 
( Nancy 1996 : 5). Th e ‘inter’ is not a cement, 
it does not create a ‘mi- lieu’. Relation is a 
tensional ‘partage’, a sharing and divid ing, 
the core of which is ‘no thing’. 
 See also 
Ecologies 
of Architecture; 
Intermediality; 
Posthuman 
Museum 
Practices; Radical Mediocrity. 
 Henk Oosterling 
 INTERMEDIALITY  
 Intermediality is a ﬁ eld of research travers-
ing three domains: arts, polit ics and philo-
sophy. Th e research is focused on the 
inter play between art discip lines (art), 
the impact of this inter play on indi vidual 
and collect ive conscious ness (polit ics) and 
the way this exper i ence mobil izes new 
concepts that enrich the current discourse 
(philo sophy). It is neither art theory nor 
philo sophy of art. It diﬀ ers from multi -
 me dia in which diﬀ er ent media are used to 
illus trate and enhance each other within 
one produc tion. Yet it is inter dis cip lin ary, 
but reaches beyond art by involving other 
discip lines of research such as philo sophy, 
while connect ing with public debates on 
soci etal issues. Intermediality research 
addresses the ques tion: what speciﬁ c 
exper i ence is triggered when artistic media 
inter act in order to trans form our discurs-
ive percep tion, taking into account polit-
ical issues and philo soph ical perspect ives? 
 In liter at ure, images have always been 
used to illus trate texts. Titles of paint ings 
in a museum setting also connect text and 
image. Aft er being read these might change 
the percep tion of the paint ing. Conceptual 
artist Joseph Kosuth, with his  One and 
Th ree Chairs (1965), is known as the 
found ing father of concep tual art. Here he 
exper i ments with multi me dia in showing a 
photo of a chair, a diction ary gloss on 
‘chair’ and a real chair within one piece of 
work. Th e install a tion art of Bruce Nauman 
or Robert Smithson’s land art involves a 
bodily aware ness in its three- dimen sional 
envir on ment. Its audi ences are aﬀ ected in a 
subtle and complex way. Th e perform ance 
art of Ulay and Abramovic exper i ments 
with its audi ences even more directly, 
trans form ing them into a constitu ent part 
of the work of art. Th e cine ma to graphic 
work of ﬁ lm director Peter Greenaway 
crosses every bound ary in using all kinds 
of media. He mixes ﬁ lm, fashion, theatre, 
dance, visual arts, archi tec ture, minimal 
music, liter at ure and the inter net, describ-
ing his ﬁ lms as ‘cinema of ideas’. In 
 Intermedialität: 
Das 
System 
Peter 
Greenaway Yvonne Spielmann qual i ﬁ es 
Greenaway’s oeuvre as ‘an aesthetic form 
of inter me di al ity . . . on a compar at ive level 
Greenaway gathers images in which the 
diﬀ er ence between medium and form is 
medi ated’ (1998: 262). Dutch theatre 
company ( ZT ) Hollandia has changed the 
theat rical land scape between 1985 and 
2000 with their innov at ive loca tion theatre, 
in which polit ical issues are addressed 
theat ric ally and acous tic ally by combin ing 
nearly all discip lines, perform ing in aban-
doned 
ware houses, 
under neath 
city
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INTERMEDIALITY 
bridges and in factor ies. So ingredi ents of 
inter me di al ity research are the product ive 
inter course of multi me dial artisti city, inter-
dis cip lin ary creativ ity and self- reﬂ ect ive 
concep tu al ity. 
 Intermediality developed itself into a 
serious academic ﬁ eld of research during 
the 1990s and has since produced a vast 
body of know ledge. Th e ﬁ rst debate and 
analyses appeared in Germany. Most of the 
research was done from a recep tion- 
aesthetic 
hermen eut ical 
perspect ive. 
French post- struc tur al ism, decon struct iv-
ism and philo sophy of diﬀ er ence provided 
new approaches. Yet the notion ‘inter-
me dia’ has its roots in early modern art. 
Samuel Coleridge coined the notion of 
‘inter me dium’ in 1812 to describe a liter ary 
process in which the func tion of symbol 
and allegory are compared (Coleridge, in 
 Raysor 1936 : 33). Th e term was rein tro-
duced by the Fluxus artist Dick Higgins: 
inter me dia. In a 1965 article he qual i ﬁ es 
the exper i ence of artworks that make use 
of two or more artistic media as inter-
me dial. In  Horizons: Th e Poetics and Th eory 
of the Intermedia  (1984) he elab or ates on 
the speciﬁ c meaning and analyt ical value 
of this notion. It is indic at ive that a member 
of the Fluxus move ment proposed this 
notion. In the 1960s Fluxus was an inter na-
tional network of artists, composers and 
design ers who blended diﬀ er ent artistic 
media and discip lines in their art prac tices. 
Th e move ment was inspired by John 
Cage and Marcel Duchamp. Th eir cross-
breed ing of perform ance, noise music, 
visual art, archi tec ture and design but 
also liter at ure –  Fluxus was the title of a 
magazine – had an expli citly anti- art and 
anti- commer cial sens ib il ity. Given this 
back ground it is possible to rewrite the 
history of twen ti eth- century avant- garde 
art from an inter me dial point of view. 
 Aft er Higgins’s ﬁ rst sketch of inter me dia 
it would take another ten years before it 
became a topic of inter na tional discourse 
on art prac tices. In the ﬁ rst half of the 1990s 
some books on inter me di al ity were 
published in Germany. Most of these texts 
dealt with the cros sov ers between liter at ure 
and theatre, but also cinema and visual arts. 
Franz-Josef Albersmeier paid atten tion to 
hybrid genres such as  ciné- roman ,  ciné- 
poème and  ciné- drama . In his critique on 
‘medial one- way traﬃ  c’, emphas iz ing the 
product ive inter ac tions between these 
genres, he hermen eut ic ally analyses cros-
sov ers that in the ﬁ nal analysis converge 
and complete each other ( Albersmeier 
1992 : 81). In  Literatur inter me dial (1995) 
Peter Zima also aims at conver gence and 
comple ment ar ity as a ‘symbi osis’ of words, 
images and sounds. By intro du cing  TV 
Jürgen Müller adds a new element. He 
refers to Higgins in  Intermedialität: Formen 
moderner 
kultureller 
Kommunikation 
(1996), conclud ing that an artistic medium 
is never pure but always already connec ted 
to other media. Conceptualization, co -
oper a tion and commu nic a tion are the 
Habermasian keywords for Müller. Artistic 
state ments are under stood and exper i-
enced within the context of a life- world 
that integ rates the diﬀ er ent exper i ences: 
‘Intermediality does not mean an adding of 
diﬀ er ent medial concepts nor a situ at ing- 
in- between- media of separ ate works, but 
an integ ra tion of aesthetic concepts of 
separ ate media in a new medial context’ 
(1996: 89). 
 In spite of Müller’s dismissal of the in- 
between ness, the tensional aspect of the 
‘inter’ and its recep tion- aesthet ical impact 
come to the fore in one of the contri bu tions 
to Zima’s book. Hubertus von Amelunxen 
elab or ates the exper i ence of the ‘inter’, 
adapt ing categor ies from Barthes’  Camera 
Lucida (1980). Th e emphasis is no longer 
on produc tion, but on an ambigu ous recep-
tion, i.e. the working of the work and its 
exper i en tial eﬀ ects. In Peter Wagner’s  Icons
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
– Texts – Iconotexts: Essays on Ekphrasis 
and Intermediality (1996) inter me di al ity is 
posi tioned as a neglected but import ant 
subdi vi sion of inter tex tu al ity. Applying 
Kristeva’s notion of inter tex tu al ity he 
stresses the poros ity of an inter act ive 
texture of images, words, move ments and 
sounds. Analysing the inter ac tions between 
images and texts in so- called ‘icon o texts’, he 
speciﬁ c ally emphas izes the diﬀ er en tial 
tension that insist within one and between 
diﬀ er ent media, resist ing an unam bigu ous 
recep tion of the work of art. In his appre ci-
ation of this defer ral, in the ﬁ nal instance 
Wagner favours Derrida’s ‘diﬀ érance’ over 
Kristeva’s textu al ity. 
 Crucial notions of French philo soph ers 
of diﬀ er ence gradu ally enter the discourse 
on inter me di al ity. Wagner remarks that 
struc tur al ist and post struc tur al ist theor-
eti cians – from Bakhtin, Barthes and 
Kristeva to Foucault, Lacan and Derrida – 
have published a series of studies that 
should have shaken the found a tions of a 
number of discip lines and put into ques-
tion cher ished beliefs as the ‘mutual illu-
min a tion of the arts’ (1996: 2). In  Luis 
Buñuel: Film – Literatur – Intermedialität 
( Link-Heer and Roloﬀ  1994 ) the idea of 
integ ra tion and symbi osis is left  behind. 
Buñuel’s ﬁ lms widens the in- between 
spaces between image and text and ‘makes 
visible the invis ible and the eerie, the 
“other” space between the discourses, that 
Foucault qual i ﬁ ed as hetero topy’ (1994: 4). 
For captur ing this hetero topic in- between, 
concep tual reﬂ ec tion alone does not 
suﬃ  ce. Buñuel’s artistic reﬂ ec tions on the 
‘inter’ of the media trans gress discurs ive 
think ing in aﬀ ect ing its audi ences with a 
speciﬁ c method. Referring to Lyotard’s  Th e 
Diﬀ erend. Phrases in Dispute  from 1983 
and apply ing its core concept to Buñuel’s 
cinema, Vittoria Borsò claims that inter-
me di al ity is focused on ‘a diﬀ  er end 
between media instead of a dialogue’ (160). 
In refer ences to Deleuze’s books on cinema, 
Volker Roloﬀ  decon structs concep tu al ity 
as the locus of reﬂ ectiv ity by stress ing the 
rela tion between think ing, images and 
bodies. 
Gradually 
the 
hermen eutic 
approach is decon struc ted by emphas iz ing 
tensional diﬀ er ences and the aﬀ ect ive 
impact of inter me dial works of art. 
Rephrased in a perspect ive that Gilles 
Deleuze and Félix Guattari developed in 
 What is Philosophy?  (1991) the primary 
emphasis in inter me dial research is on a 
multi- faceted reﬂ ec tion involving sensa-
tions (art), aﬀ ects (micro pol it ics) and 
concepts (philo sophy). 
 For an under stand ing of the in-between, 
a more system atic imple ment a tion of a 
philo sophy of diﬀ er ence is instruct ive. In 
criti ciz ing dialectics, hermen eut ics and 
struc tur al ism, these philo soph ers have 
impli citly forged a vocab u lary that is more 
apt at under stand ing the ‘inter’. Th eir 
critique on the rational subject and the 
decon struc tion of oppos i tional think ing 
ﬁ nds a coun ter part in the artistic research 
on inter me di al ity. Eventually this raises 
the ques tion as to the speciﬁ c quality 
of the ‘inter’ of inter me di al ity. Philoso-
phically this concerns the ‘sensa tional’, 
non- discurs ive quality of the being ( esse ) 
of this in-between ( inter ), i.e. of inter- esse . 
 See also Art; Interest/Interesse; Meta-
modernism; Radical Mediocrity. 
 Henk Oosterling 
 INVARIANCE  
 Th e main inclin a tion that this article will 
try to develop concerns a danger that 
Michel Serres has stated as follows: not to 
confuse invari ance and iden tity ( Serres 
1992 ). Jacques Monod, to whom Serres 
refers with this state ment, has pointed out
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INVARIANCE 
regard to what he calls the ‘quantic revolu-
tion’: 1 ‘Th e prin ciple of iden tity does not 
belong, as a postu late, in clas sical physics. 
Th ere it is employed only as a logical 
device, nothing requir ing that it be taken 
to corres pond to a substan tial reality’ 
( Monod 1972 ). Aft er the quantic revolu-
tion, however, the prin ciple of iden tity 
ceases to be a merely logical device; in 
quantum physics, one of its 
 root assump tions is the  abso lute iden tity 
of two atoms found in the same quantum 
state. 2 Whence also the abso lute, non- 
perfect ible 
repres ent a tional 
value 
quantum theory assigns to atomic and 
molecu lar symmet ries. And so today it 
seems that the prin ciple of iden tity can no 
longer be conﬁ ned to the status simply of 
a rule of logical deriv a tion: it must be 
accep ted as express ing, at least on the 
quantic scale, a substan tial reality. 
 Monod 1972 : 101 
 But isn’t the notion of iden tity, at least in 
its philo soph ical scope, always already 
entangled with notions of substance? And 
hasn’t it been one of the most valu able 
achieve ments of twen ti eth- century philo-
soph ical discourse to argue that talk of 
iden tity, at least with regard to cultural 
issues, is unne ces sary? Th at its substan ti al-
ity is always already discurs ively consti-
tuted? And that we can learn from science 
that to speak of iden tity means evoking a 
logical abstrac tion, at odds with any realist 
posi tion? I would suggest that the issue 
had better be addressed in terms of a 
notion of mater i al ity that must be forged 
in a situ ated manner. Th is notion of mater-
i al ity is obliged to take into account a very 
large number of factors, to a degree of 
complex ity about which we can only learn 
from ‘real’ bodies of all kinds. Th is includes 
organic and/or chem ical bodies, with 
regard to their envir on mental niches (in 
‘culture’ as well as in ‘nature’) and the evol-
u tion ary inter play among such niches (in 
the earth and envir on mental sciences as 
well as in history and polit ics). Th is is situ-
ated mater i al ity rather than completely 
drawn from ideally construc ted typo lo-
gies, morpho lo gies or ideo lo gies. Must it 
not be regarded as an ethical oblig a tion to 
commit ourselves to a deriv at ive, diﬀ er en-
tial and func tional view on sexuation 
(onto lo gies: 
gendered ness, 
queer ness, 
nomadi city, ‘bodies- that-matter’) rather 
than 
a 
struc tural 
or 
homeo static, 
symmetry- based and equa tional view 
rooted in iden tity (meta phys ics: prin-
ciples, laws, axioms, elements, atoms; cf 
espe cially Haraway 2012)? Hasn’t this 
been the great eman cip a tion of the last few 
decades? It certainly has. And it is at the 
core of the confu sion of which Serres 
warns us, between invari ance and iden tity. 
In such a confu sion, this term,  invari ance , 
would cast a shadow against whatever 
bright ness about the future may be evoked 
by the pain fully wrought emphasis on 
diﬀ er ence over iden tity and the ethical 
prac tices of coun ter bal an cing norm ativ ity 
and stand ard iz a tion through the appraisal 
of singu lar ity in its own rights. But Serres’ 
warning of confu sion not only points to 
the fragil ity of how we value the eman cip-
at ory worth of such critique; it also entails 
coming to terms with a notion of substan-
tial and abso lute iden tity.  3   
 A blue alga, an infus orian, an octopus, 
and a human being – what had they in 
common? With the discov ery of the cell 
and the advent of cellu lar theory a 
new unity could be seen under this 
diversity. But it was some time before 
advances in biochem istry, mainly during 
the second quarter of this century, 
revealed the profound and strict oneness, 
on the micro scopic level, of the whole of 
the living world. 
 Monod 1972 : 102
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 Th is oneness is the subject of Serres’ 
ciphered atomism ( Serres 2000 [1977] ), of 
the entropic catar act of atoms falling, 
as particles of regu lar ity in declin a tion – 
clin a men, an angu lar ity – through the void, 
conjug at ing into local turbu lence, where 
and by which ‘atoms meet’ (ibid.: 6); his 
notion of the atom is the minimal condi-
tion to explain how turbu lence forms, 
‘appear ing stochastic ally in laminar ﬂ ow’ 
(ibid.), the substance of chance, the catar-
act. His notion of the atom encrypts the 
magnitude of a substan tial notion of chance 
as the univer sal prin ciple ( Zufall ), in which 
pockets of negen tropy capture local and 
tempor ary order: ‘Systems of conser va tion 
for chance, systems which orient ate and 
control them selves, packed to their limits 
with negen tropy. Enzyme cata lysis, a capa-
city for discrim at ory selec tion’ ( Serres 1992 : 
63). Can onto gen etic life (specious life 
forms) be compat ible with the second law 
of ther mo dy nam ics (the drift  towards 
maximum entropy, the disin teg ra tion of all 
forms of organ iz a tion into its atom iz a tion 
where each particle of form al ity is of equal 
prob ab il ity), appar ently compat ible only 
with phylo gen etic life (the common origin 
of all indi vidu als), he asks? And Serres 
main tains yes, it can: ‘the concep tual pair 
inform a tion–entropy reduces to a level of 
the object ive, calcul able, posit ive, the old 
meta phys ical twin notions of chance and 
neces sity’ (ibid.: 62). Because the role of 
inform a tion as a currency in the economic 
calcu la tions of the ther mo dy namic balance 
sheets (inform a tion is not gratu itious, every 
obser va tion has its price, cf.  Negentropy , 
and  Maxwell’s Demon ), we ﬁ nd aﬀ orded by 
the pair inform a tion–entropy  a phys ical 
theory of herit age.  
 Th e ques tion that can be fore groun ded 
by a discus sion of the term ‘invari ance’ 
concerns how substan tial iden tity, abso lute 
because governed by chance, might 
possibly be distin guished in quant it at ive 
terms. What Michel Serres and Jacques 
Monod, build ing on the inform a tion 
theory in the tradi tion of Oswald Wiener, 
Léo Szilard and Léon Brillouin, suggest (cf. 
 Negentropy ) is that such iden tity can be 
quant ized as binding amounts of inform a-
tion capable of preserving a certain struc-
ture 
across 
vari able 
trans form a tions. 
Monod’s invari ance can be under stood as 
an ‘invari ance content’ (quant ized specie- 
iality) that is ‘equal to the amount of 
inform a tion which, trans mit ted from one 
gener a tion to the next, assures the preser-
va tion of the speciﬁ c struc tural stand ard’ 
( Monod 1972 : 13). Invariance is reserved 
for a quant ity that estab lishes a niveau of 
inform a tion or negen tropy ( Serres 1992 : 
57) (bound inform a tion). What is hence 
estab lished, from invari ant content, is what 
Monod calls ‘teleo nomic inform a tion’. 
Teleonomy refers to prob ab il istic calcu la-
tions on the combin at or ial total of trans-
fers that can apply, in conform ity with the 
laws of conser va tion, to an invari ant 
amount of inform a tion ( Monod 1972 : 14). 
It is Monod’s great achieve ment to have 
distin guished (1) an  oper able deﬁ n i tion of 
chance as the  unknown (due to the imper-
fect exper i ment, while not knowing all the 
initial condi tions, the cost of obser va-
tions), chance at work in logical/formal 
terms in stochastical stat ist ics; and (2) an 
 essen tial deﬁ n i tion of chance, by attrib ut-
ing chance a substan tial and abso lute iden-
tity. 4 We can easily asso ci ate the oper able 
chance with entropy as an oper a tional 
measure in ther mo dy nam ics, and essen tial 
chance with the prin ciple assump tion that 
the amount total of energy in the universe 
be ﬁ nite and invari ant. Th e latter cannot be 
counted; it can only be coded and like the 
iden tity of all life forms in terms of  DNA , 
it can be deciphered through translating 
between manners of coding. 
 Th ere is a univer sal nature (substan tial 
iden tity) that pertains to all things, and
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
INVARIANCE 
object’s ‘strange ness’. 5 One confuses invari-
ance with iden tity whenever one reads 
Monod’s use of ‘strange’ in his discus sion of 
‘strange objects’ as an adject ive. Serres 
elab or ates: ‘strange does not qualify a 
substant ive’, rather ‘strange’ oper ates as a 
quan ti ﬁ er, not as a qual i ﬁ er. Th e molecu lar 
theory of the genetic code is ‘a phys ical 
theory of herit age’ that comple ments the 
Darwinian evol u tion ary view. A phys ical 
theory of inher it ance is a basis that quan ti-
ﬁ es substant ives in terms of diﬀ er ent 
niveaus of negen tropy (as amounts of 
chance, that can be deciphered from the 
mutu ally implic at ive rela tion between 
invari ant and teleo nomic inform a tion). 
With his notion of the  strange object , 
Monod suggests a notion of the object that 
neither contra dicts the prin ciples of 
physics (second law of ther mo dy nam ics, 
one univer sal ity) nor those of Darwinian 
biology (natural selec tion in evol u tion, 
plur al ist univer sal ity of natural kinds). 
Hence onto gen etic and phylo gen etic life 
are both compat ible with ther mo dy nam-
ics. But the central assump tion thereby is 
that invari ance genet ic ally, chem ic ally and 
phys ic ally 
precedes 
tele onomy: 
‘the 
 Genomenon is the secret code of the 
 Phaenomenon ’, as Serres puts it (1992: 59). 
Th e ‘strange object’ is one which neither 
presup poses a distinc tion between natural 
and arti ﬁ  cial, things endowed with a 
purpose (project) and things natural 
(without purpose), nor one between 
animate and inert. It is crucial for under-
stand ing Monod’s primacy of code to 
emphas ize that what is all- too-oft en short- 
circuited as ‘the code of life’, to Monod is a 
rela tion between code and its secret (life) 
that is one of mutual  inde pend ence , one 
regard ing the phenomenon of life (not life 
itself) and one entirely chance- bound in 
the substan tial deﬁ n i tion of the term: 
 between the occur rences that can provoke 
or permit an error in the  replic a tion of the 
genetic message and its func tional 
consequences there is also a complete 
inde pend ence. Th e func tional eﬀ ect 
depends upon the struc ture, upon the 
actual role of the modi ﬁ ed protein, 
upon the inter ac tions it ensures, upon the 
reac tions it cata lyzes – all things which 
have nothing to do with the muta tional 
event itself nor with its imme di ate or 
remote causes, regard less of the nature, 
whether determ in istic or not, of those 
causes. 
 Monod 1972 : 114 
 In order to illus trate this postu lated inde-
pend ence between the code itself and its 
artic u lated mani fest a tions, Monod discusses 
the coin cid ence of genu inely hetero gen ous 
sequences via the example of a worker ﬁ xing 
a roof, letting go of his tool acci dent ally, and 
a passer- by who is in no way related to the 
worker on the roof but who is hit by the 
falling tool and killed thereby. If one were to 
assume that there be a larger logics that 
homo gen izes these two hetero gen ous series, 
one would indeed have to assume that the 
passer- by was fate fully predic ated to die like 
this from the very begin ning of his exist-
ence; against the assump tion of such fatal-
ism, Monod stresses his two deﬁ n i tions of 
chance as (1) oper able and (2) substan tial. 
While the genetic text itself is a closed and 
ﬁ nite system (with its resid ual alpha bet of 
amino acids and nucle otides), the source of 
the biosphere’s incred ible variety results 
from errors in the tran scrip tion of the code’s 
sequences. For this tran scrip tion process it is 
crucial that one always has to consider  pairs 
of nucle otides (liter ally  that which is with a 
nucleus ); one cannot do with singu lar ized 
and original ones. Th ese pairs – and this is 
the essen tial role invari ant amounts of 
inform a tion need to play, coun ter bal an cing 
the struc tural tele onomy of bound inform a-
tion – must be deciphered in a double sense.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
‘IT’
Th is is how Serres can say: ‘nature is hidden 
twice. First, under the cypher. Th en under 
a dexter ity, a modesty, a subtlety, which 
prevents our reading the cypher even from 
an open book. Nature hides under a hidden 
cypher. 
Experimentation, 
inter ven tion, 
consist in making it appear’ ( Serres 2000 : 
140).  6  
 See also Equation; Negentropy; Maxwell’s 
Demon.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
‘IT’ 
Cabra. A scholar and an outlaw; this time 
they both live to walk away, and so there’s a 
story to tell. Th ey will meet one more time 
to walk away again and then, for the last 
time, in a prison cell as the bandit, Don 
José, awaits execu tion. His lover, Carmen, 
the devil girl, the wild gypsy, the story’s 
turbu lent  raison d’être , lies dead by his 
hand. Sentence has been passed and waits 
only to be carried out. Everything is 
decided. It remains only to recount what 
has already happened. To discover the 
might- have-beens, the paths not taken, it is 
neces sary to work back wards. What lies 
upstream of the facts? What is there before 
the branch ing and bifurc at ing of ways, 
before the decisions that produce this 
world rather than that, this story rather 
than that? Might liter at ure know some-
thing about this that science can’t?
 Begs to diﬀ er 
 
 
Never ends 
 Th e ‘inter’ of inter locut tion 
 
 
Vibrations and ﬂ ows 
 Absent, worth less, ridicu lous . . . 
 Th e Th ird Man 
 Racketeering amid the rubble 
 
 
Th e excluded third 
 Outside the conver sa tion 
 
Outside commu nic a tion 
 
 
Outside belong ing 
 Or just outside . . .? 
 Th e philo spher Michel Serres summar izes 
the plot of Prosper Merimée’s novella 
 Carmen (1845) to illus trate the import ance 
of what he calls the third person ( Serres 
1997 : 57–62). Serres’s third person desig-
nates whoever or whatever is excluded from 
the community of inter locutors, of ‘I’ or ‘we’ 
and ‘you’. Linguists have oft en emphas ized 
the import ance of such pronomial ‘shift ers’ 
in orient ing and enabling human commu-
nic a tion ( Silverstein 1979 ). Serres’ concern, 
however, extends beyond the human. Th e 
third person, for Serres, partakes simul tan-
eously of exclus iv ity and inclus iv ity. It can 
encom pass not only speciﬁ c excluded 
others – the ‘hidden people’ implied in any 
two- way exchange – but also extern al ity in 
general – the world as such in the imper-
son al ity of its taking place – it rains, it hails, 
it snows, it thun ders. More expans ively still, 
it is also the third person that gives and 
artic u lates Being, as rendered in the French 
expres sion for being there –  il y a ( Serres 
1997 : 46). 
 Serres of course attaches great import-
ance to such third spaces, the spaces of 
trans ition and trans form a tion, of aber ra-
tion and incal cul ab il ity, the middle where 
everything commences. Such are the spaces 
of the para site, of the inerad ic able noise 
that accom pan ies and enables mean ing ful 
commu nic a tion, of the depar tures and 
cast ings oﬀ  that inaug ur ate new projects 
and entit ies, and of the tortu ous and elusive 
‘north w est passage’ between the insti tu-
tion ally diver gent know ledge- cultures of 
the sciences and human it ies. Serres 
describes himself too as occupy ing such a 
tertiary zone, that of the ‘instruc ted third’ 
( Le Tiers Instruit being the original, French 
title of  Th e Troubadour of Knowledge ): a 
left - hander taught to use the right, 
‘completed’ as he puts it, a self- described 
descend ent of Gascon peas ants, turned 
sailor, turned math em atician, turned philo-
sopher – passing always through the 
middle, the unde cide able. Th e third person 
and third space are at once between and
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
‘IT’
ante cedent to the oppos i tional diﬀ er en ti-
ation of subject and object or self and other, 
eﬀ ect ing an opening to the universe in all 
its turbu lent gener ativ ity.
 Th e space 
of extern al ity 
in general 
 Excluded but all- inclus ive 
 All the others – objectiv ity 
 Necessity –  
 il faut 
 From nothing to everything 
 
and back again 
 Art and liter at ure have some times been 
described as quint es sen tially human istic 
pursuits but perhaps they are no less 
marked by a constitutive  in human ity. 
Deleuze once wrote that liter at ure’s closest 
aﬃ  n it ies lay not with the ﬁ rst two persons 
of I/you inter locu tion but with the imper-
son al ity of the third person: ‘it is not the 
ﬁ rst two persons that func tion as the 
condi tion of liter ary enun ci ation; liter a-
ture begins only when a third person is 
born in us that strips away the power to say 
“I” (Deleuze 1997d: 3). 1 Th e third person 
artic u lates the space not only of missing 
or absent people, the ‘people to come’ to 
whom, accord ing to Deleuze, art and 
liter at ure address them selves but also that 
of what Deleuze else where refers to as ‘ a 
life’ ( Deleuze 2001 ). ‘ A  life’ describes a 
condi tion of pure imman ance, of the kind 
that Spinoza, another of Deleuze’s inter-
locutors, took to obtain between divine 
‘substance’, the inﬁ n ity of ‘attrib utes’ into 
which it determ ines itself and the ‘modes’ 
through which it is actu al ized ( Spinoza 
1992 ). It is composed of virtu al it ies, events 
and singu lar it ies and thus possessed of a 
distinc t ive ness that cannot be reduced to 
a deter m in ate iden tity ( Deleuze 2001 ). As 
such ‘ a life’ precedes its indi vidu ation in 
the guise of a subject or an organ ism. 
Indeed, as Claire Colebrook has sugges ted, 
it assigns no neces sary priv ilege to the 
organic, but can be thought of rather as 
an imper sonal force of diﬀ er ence and 
becom ing that extends beyond biolo gical 
evol u tion to encom pass the geolo gic 
and plan et ary prehis tory that Deeuze and 
Guattari’s ‘geophilo sophy’ would seek to 
evoke ( Colebrook 2010 ;  Deleuze and 
Guattari 1994 ). 
 Th e Brazilian writer Clarice Lispector 
(like Deleuze an avid reader of Spinoza) 
calls it the ‘ it ’ – an inhuman life of matter 
forming the imper sonal substrate of exper-
i ence and subjectiv ity without being 
directly access ible to either, or indeed to 
language, demand ing that words be used 
as ‘bait . . . ﬁ shing for whatever is not word’. 
Variously char ac ter ized as ‘living and soft ’ 
and ‘hard like a pebble’ the ‘ it ’ is to be 
approached circuit ously via a succes sion of 
mythic, animal, veget able and mineral 
meta morph oses, 
a 
multi plic a tion 
of 
analogues and personae convey ing its 
shift  ing and elusive being – insects, birds, 
frogs, tigers, black panthers, witches, Diana 
the hunt ress, pesti len tial swamps, caverns 
ﬁ lled 
with 
stalac tites 
and 
fossils. 
Sometimes, however, one catches a more 
direct glimpse – for example, watch ing the 
birth of an animal: 
  To be born: I’ve watched a cat give birth. 
Th e kitten emerges wrapped in a sack 
of ﬂ uid and all huddled inside. Th e 
mother licks the sack of ﬂ uid so many 
times that it ﬁ nally breaks and there a 
kitten almost free, only attached by its 
umbil ical cord. Th en the mother- creator-
cat breaks that cord with her teeth and 
another fact appears in the world. Th at 
process is  it . 
 Lispector 2010 : 28 
 ‘It’ – not the animal thus born into the 
world, but the  process of its birth ing.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
‘IT’ 
 Is ‘It’ another term for the Unconscious, 
then? Perhaps. Or perhaps not. Freud’s 
expos i tion of the Unconscious draws 
inter change ably on the German third- 
person-singular neuter –  Es  – and on the 
Latin  Id . For Deleuze, Lispector and Serres, 
however, the third person seems to refer-
ence some thing more expans ive than the 
psychic economy of libid inal repres sion 
and paternal law that would become part 
of the ortho doxy of a later Freudianism. 
Jean-Luc Nancy acknow ledges as much 
when he writes that what is at stake, ulti-
mately, in Freud’s concept of the  Id is ‘what 
links us together . . . not only us humans 
but the total ity of beings – the animal 
within us, and even the veget able, the 
mineral’ ( Nancy 2012 : 91).
 Bats, rats, crabs, cock roaches, wild 
horses . . . 
 Carnivorous plants 
 Legendary animals 
 Elemental creatures 
 Mythical sex 
 Soft  oyster placenta 
 Hard pebble 
 God is  it ? 
 We might ask then whether intim a tions 
of such an inhuman, asub jectival life are 
symp to matic of a contem por ary crisis of 
human ism, fuelled by, amongst other 
things, global capit al ism, rapid tech no lo-
gical change and fears of impend ing ecolo-
gical cata strophe? Or are art and liter at ure 
in the present simply artic u lat ing what 
many humans in many other times and 
places have always known? Th e early 
twen ti eth- century Danish anthro po lo gist 
Knud Rasmussen, trav el ing in Arctic 
Canada in the 1920s, found that his Inuit 
hosts used the name ‘Sila’ to refer to a 
power (usually, but not always male- 
iden ti ﬁ ed) asso ci ated, vari ously, with the 
air, the wind, the weather, the phys ical 
envir on ment in general or the anim at ing 
‘breath’ of the natural world. Sila (other-
wise referred to as or the ‘indweller in 
the wind’) was iden ti ﬁ ed both as the 
defender of tradi tional observ ances and 
punisher of taboo viol a tions and as the 
patron and guard ian of shamans and 
sham anic initi ations. Rasmussen learned 
that Inuit shamans did not derive their 
power from their retinue of helping spirits 
(who could take a variety of human- like
 or animal forms) but from a more elusive 
and diﬀ use power that could never be 
deﬁ n it ively person i ﬁ ed. It was a shaman – 
or  angakoq – by the name of Najagneq 
from Nunivak island who described 
Sila to Rasmussen in the follow ing 
terms: 
 A great spirit, support ing the world and 
the weather and all life on earth, a spirit 
so mighty that his utter ance to mankind 
is not through common words, but by 
storm and snow and rain and the fury of 
the sea; all the forces of nature that men 
fear . . . When all is well, Sila sends no 
message to mankind, but with draws into 
his own endless noth ing ness, apart. So 
he remains as long as men do not abuse 
life, but act with rever ence toward their 
daily food . . . No one has seen Sila, his 
place of being is a mystery, in that he 
is at once among us and unspeak ably 
far away. 
 Rasmussen 1999 : 385–6 
 What lies hidden between ‘you’ and ‘I’? 
 Remote and up close 
 Th e last substratum 
 
 
Th e imper sonal
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
‘IT’
 
Inside 
 Outside 
 Everything . . . 
  It is. . . .  
 See also Animacies; Animism; Anonymity  
 Note 
 1. Deleuze comments: ‘Literature here 
seems to refute the linguistic concep tion, 
which ﬁ nds in shift ers, and notably in the 
ﬁ rst two persons, the very condi tion of 
enun ci ation’ (1997: 185). 
 Stuart McLean
JOY, ETHICS OF 
proposes an ethical coding that distin-
guishes power rela tions that are empower-
ing – aﬃ  rm at ive or active – from those 
that are entrap ping – disem power ing or 
react ive. Th e former enhance  poten tia (the 
posit ive face of power), whereas the latter 
play into  potestas (the restrict ive face of 
power). Politically, it is asso ci ated with an 
onto lo gical form of paci ﬁ sm that is espe-
cially relev ant for ecolo gical justice, 
envir on mental activ ism and posthu man 
ethics. 
 Th e ethics of joy requires the follow ing 
condi tions. First, given that power is a 
complex stra tegic situ ation that humans 
constantly inhabit, but with diﬀ er ent 
degrees of entrap ment and empower ment, 
it is best posited as a continuum. Th is 
implies that terms like active and react ive, 
negat ive and posit ive, are not to be under-
stood as dialect ical oppos ites, but rather 
as nego ti able and revers ible points of 
encounter with others. 
 Second, 
‘aﬃ  rm at ive/posit ive’ 
and 
‘react ive/negat ive’ aﬀ ects are not to be 
taken as emotional states in a psycho lo-
gical frame that assumes the liberal indi-
vidual as point of refer ence. Within a 
posthu man frame work aﬀ ects are rather to 
be under stood as trans versal, non- human 
forces that need to be assessed in terms of 
their impact on subjects and on the world. 
Th e ethical beha viour is what can activ ate 
and increase rela tional capa cit ies ( poten tia ) 
and the uneth ical is what restricts or 
hampers them. Th is assumes that the 
ethical subject desires and is driven to the 
 JOY, ETHICS OF  
 Posthuman crit ical theory produces an 
ethics of joy or aﬃ  rm a tion. A joyful ethics 
rests on an enlarged sense of a vital inter-
con nec tion with a multi tude of (human 
and non- human) others by remov ing the 
obstacle of self- centred indi vidu al ism and 
anthro po centrism on the one hand and 
the barri ers of negat iv ity on the other. It 
assumes a new- mater i al ist philo sophy that 
rejects dual istic oppos i tions and posits all 
subjects as diﬀ er en tial modu la tions of a 
common matter. Th is polit ical vision rejects 
the dialectics that pitches self- versus-other. 
It is crit ical of the import ance granted to 
negat iv ity in the dialect ical scheme, where 
diﬀ er ence is tradi tion ally deﬁ ned as ‘diﬀ er-
ent from’ a domin ant norm, which is 
hence inter preted as ‘less than’. A joyful 
ethics frees diﬀ er ence from pejor a tion and 
replaces it with posit iv ity. 
 Consequently the polit ics ﬂ owing from 
aﬃ  rm at ive ethics does not postu late 
subjectiv ity along the binary oppos i tional 
axes that separ ate humans from non- 
humans, culture from nature, ‘us’ from 
‘them’. On the contrary, posthu man 
subjectiv ity is nomadic, distrib uted, rela-
tional and process- oriented. Th is process 
onto logy, inspired by femin ist theory 
( Lloyd 1994 ) and contem por ary re- read-
ings of Spinoza in French philo sophy 
( Deleuze 1988b ,  1992b ), asserts a trust ful 
rela tion ship with the world and allows 
for greater inter ac tion between humans 
and non- humans. An aﬃ  rm at ive stance 
 J
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
JOY, ETHICS OF
aﬃ  rm a tion of a posit ive essence ( conatus ) 
that yearns for the expres sion of its 
freedom and force. In other words, humans 
– like all living entit ies – are drawn to 
perpetu ate  and struc tur ally grav it ate 
around posit iv ity. 
 Th ird, the notion of the negat ive refers 
less to a norm at ive value than to the eﬀ ect of 
arrest and block age that oft en comes as a 
result of a hurt, a shock, an act of moral, 
epistemic or emotional viol ence, or by 
intense tedium. Negative passions destroy 
the self’s capa city to act as they harm the 
self’s ability to inter- relate to others – both 
human and non- human – and thus decrease 
one’s rela tion ship to the world. On a larger 
spec trum, negat ive aﬀ ects dimin ish the 
capa city to express the high levels of inter-
de pend ence, the vital reli ance on others, 
that consti tute the key to an aﬃ  rm at ive or 
joyful ethics. 
 Fourth, joyful ethics redeﬁ nes the 
persist ence of destruct ive or negat ive rela-
tions. Mindful that not all rela tions are  a 
priori posit ive, it makes the ethical distinc-
tion between, for instance, aﬃ  rm at ive 
encoun ters and aggress ive disem power-
ment. Th e ethics of joy does not deny the 
reality of pain, trauma and viol ence, but 
rather proposes a diﬀ er ent way of dealing 
with them. It warns against the pious 
harmon iz a tion of conﬂ icts and oﬀ ers an 
altern at ive struc ture of dealing with diﬀ er-
ence, which is not oppos i tional in a dialect-
ical mode but still allows for antag on ism. 
Joyful ethics consists in being able to tell 
the diﬀ er ence, but to recog nize it posit-
ively, so as to enact the trans mu ta tion 
of a negat ive rela tion into an aﬃ  rm at ive 
mode. 
 Th e ethics of joy does not equate 
acqui es cence with the condi tions of the 
present: endur ance is not resig na tion and 
imman ence is not the mystical accept ance 
that all that lives is holy. What is required 
instead is an active prac tice of collect ive 
trans form a tion of negat ive rela tions and 
passions into aﬃ  rm at ive ones: a polit ical 
praxis. Cooperation means active labour-
ing towards an adequate under stand ing 
of condi tions, which is not the same as 
endors ing them. Th e aim of produ cing an 
adequate carto graphy of the present condi-
tions is to identify points of resist ance. 
 What is posit ive in the ethics of aﬃ  rm-
a tion is the belief that negat ive rela tions 
and passions can be trans formed through 
an engage ment in collect ive prac tices of 
change. Th is implies a dynamic view of 
passions and aﬀ ects, even those that 
freeze us in pain, horror or mourn ing. Th e 
ethical subject is the one with the force to 
grasp the freedom to deper son al ize the 
event and trans form its negat ive charge. 
Th is is in keeping with the method of de- 
famil i ar iz a tion that is central to posthu-
man thought (see  crit ical posthu man 
theory  in this volume). Aﬃ  rmative ethics 
puts the motion back into  e -motion and 
the active back into activ ism. 
 Consequently, the ethics of joy is about 
tran scend ing the force of the negat ive by 
acknow ledging negat ive emotions like 
pain, anger, greed and fear. It is about a 
process of becom ing: becom ing- ethical. 
Th is is a far cry from apply ing moral rules 
and proto cols as a form of self- protec tion. 
 Endurance is the Spinozist term for this 
process, which has both a spatial and a 
temporal aspect. Th e spatial aspect has to 
do with the body as an enﬂ eshed, aﬀ ect ive 
ﬁ eld of actu al iz a tion of passions or forces. 
Endurance combines vulner ab il ity with 
resi li ence. It stresses the struggle to sustain 
the pain without being anni hil ated by 
it. It thus opens the temporal dimen sion; 
the dura tion in time. Joyful or aﬃ  rm at ive 
ethics is based on a collect ive praxis of 
endur ing – surviv ing and lasting – by 
construct ing posit iv ity. Th is means to 
undo exist ing condi tions so as to actu al ize 
altern at ives. Every event contains within
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
JOY, ETHICS OF 
over taken: its negat ive charge can always 
be trans posed ( Glissant 1997 ). 
 Th e ethics of joy is thus at heart a 
process of becom ing. Because such a 
becom ing is not contained in present 
condi tions, and cannot emerge from 
them, it has to be brought about creat ively 
by a qual it at ive leap of collect ive praxis 
and ethical imagin a tion. To accom plish an 
ethics of joy, ‘we’ need to compose a 
community and produce a qual it at ive leap 
that breaks product ively with the present. 
Th e ﬁ rst step consists in reach ing an 
adequate carto graphy of the condi tions 
of bondage. Th e ethics of joy proposes an 
altern at ive way of extract ing knowledge 
from pain, that starts with and is conveyed 
by the quest for an adequate under standing 
of power. Th e analysis of power as a 
complex 
and 
multi- layered 
situ ation 
subjects are caught in is consequently the 
begin ning of ethical wisdom. 
 Th e second step consists in mobil iz ing 
a subject’s onto lo gical desire – the vital 
 poten tia  of the subject – by refram ing it in 
disrupt ive direc tions capable of resist ing 
codes and powers. Th e ethics of joy is 
engendered by the collect ive construc tion 
of ethical subjects who actively desire 
other wise and thus break with the  doxa , 
the acqui es cent applic a tion of estab lished 
norm and values, by de- territ ori al iz ing 
them and intro du cing altern at ive ethical 
ﬂ ows. An ethics of joy shows that the 
motor of polit ical change is an aﬃ  rm at ive 
force, not merely dialect ical oppos i tion. 
 Th e third step is to create a labor at ory 
of the new. To live out the shared capa city 
to aﬀ ect and to be aﬀ ected, posthu man 
subjects need to disen gage the process of 
subject form a tion from negat iv ity by 
attach ing it to aﬃ  rm at ive and rela tional 
vision of the self. Th e ethics of joy is a 
prag matic engage ment with the present in 
order to collect ively construct condi tions 
that trans form and empower the capa city 
to act ethic ally and produce social hori-
zons of hope and sustain able futures 
( Braidotti 2006a ). 
 A fourth step to achieve an ethics of joy 
is to acknow ledge life as a gener at ive force 
of becom ing. Th is means that life,  zoe , is a- 
personal and non- anthro po centric. What 
is aﬃ  rmed in the ethics of joy is precisely 
the power of  zoe /life itself – its very  poten-
tia . Life is a dynamic force that unfolds 
through vital ﬂ ows of connec tions and 
becom ing. An ethics of joy taps into that 
ﬂ ow. Th e Kantian imper at ive not to do 
unto others what you would not want done 
to you gets thus enlarged. In aﬃ  rm at ive 
ethics the harm you do to others is imme-
di ately reﬂ ec ted in the harm you do to 
your self; what’s more, life itself gets 
dimin ished in terms of loss of  poten tia, the 
capa city to relate, and to explore one’s 
freedom. 
 A ﬁ ft h step for an ethics of joy entails 
sustain ing processes of subject- form a tion 
that do not comply with the domin ant 
norms. For posthu man theory, the subject 
is fully immersed in and imman ent to a 
network of non- human rela tions: animal, 
veget able, viral, tech no lo gical. Th is process- 
oriented vision of the subject expresses a 
groun ded form of account ab il ity, based on 
renewed claim to community and belong-
ing to ‘a collab or at ive moral ity’ ( Lloyd 
1996 : 74). When applied to envir on mental 
issues, the ethics of joy thus involves 
continu ous nego ti ations with both domin-
ant norms and values and the polit ics of 
aﬃ  rm at ive and sustain able altern at ives. It 
entails a new way of combin ing ethical 
values with the well- being of an enlarged 
sense of community. It expresses multiple 
ecolo gies of belong ing that acknow ledge 
the collect ive nature and outward- bound 
direc tion of the nomadic self. Th e post -
hu man era needs to create ethical subjects 
through a collect ive prac tice activ ated
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
JOY, ETHICS OF
 See also  Posthuman Critical Th eory; 
Posthuman Ethics; Process Ontologies; 
Neo/New Materialism; Mattering; Non- 
human Agency. 
 Rosi Braidotti 
around the shared desire to actu al ize new 
poten tials. An ethics of joy then means 
that ‘we’ are becom ing posthu man ethical 
subjects in our evolving capa cit ies for 
cooper at ing in the compos i tion of aﬃ  rm-
at ive rela tions.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
KIN 
ﬁ rst and fore most on the grounds of sexual 
repro duct ive rela tions. 
 Th e 1970s and 1980s also witnessed the 
emer gence of what can be called ‘femin ist 
anthro po logy’, and with it a greater focus 
on de- natur al iz a tion of the notion of kin 
through the critique of its basic premises: 
gender, repro duc tion and power hier arch-
ies. 2   A strong push towards the inter rog a-
tion of the nature–culture divide as it 
relates to kin- making also came from the 
works of schol ars such as Sarah Franklin 
( 1997 ,  2001 ,  2013 ), Marilyn Strathern 
( 1992a ,  1992b ), Henrietta Moore ( 1986 , 
 1988 ,  1994 ) and Janet Carsten ( 2004 ). Th ese 
schol ars argue that with the advance ment 
of bio- and repro duct ive tech no lo gies, as 
well as with new family form a tions gaining 
visib il ity (examples may include  LGBTQ 
famil ies or, more recently, three- parent 
famil ies formed via  IVF that combines a 
donor mito chon dria with  DNA  of two 
other parents 3 ) the core ques tions of 
kinship – what consti tutes a biolo gical tie 
and what is the signi ﬁ c ance of such ties in 
kin- making – are constantly re- deﬁ ned, not 
least by tech no lo gical medi ation. Th ese con-
 tem por ary devel op ments re- invig or ated 
the ﬁ eld of kinship studies and gave an 
impetus to not only chal lenge the inher ent 
anthro po centrism and human ism of the 
ﬁ eld but also inquire into cross- species and 
post- human kinship rela tions. 4   
 Much of the above- mentioned schol ar-
ship owes to Donna Haraway’s creat ive 
re- imagin ings of kinship through the 
 KIN  
 Th is entry outlines a multis pe cies account 
of kin in Donna Haraway’s work in general 
and more speciﬁ c ally in the book  Staying 
With Th e Trouble: Making Kin in the 
Chthulucene 
(2016). 
Donna 
Haraway 
proposes kinship as a non- gene a lo gical 
mode of rela tion that is based on response- 
ability and becom ing- with, extend ing 
beyond Anthropos and human ist accounts 
of rela tion al ity. I will start by brieﬂ y sketch-
ing out the context of kinship studies and 
the way it has been chal lenged by femin ist 
perspect ives, and will then discuss Haraway’s 
work against this back ground. 
 Kin struc tures were primar ily the 
research object of anthro po logy, a discip-
line that was founded, accord ing to Franklin 
and Ragoné ( 1998 ), amongst the obses sion 
with kinship, procre ation and succes sion. 
Classical anthro po logy not only researched 
kinship mainly in the so- called ‘prim it ive’ 
soci et ies, 1 in order to answer the ques tion 
of how they func tioned without a clear 
regu lat ory appar atus of the state, but also 
deﬁ ned it primar ily as gene a lo gical and 
inher it ance- based phenomenon ( Carsten 
2008 ). Kinship was moreover natur al ized 
in that it was seen as a product of nature – a 
stance that in the mid- twen ti eth century 
started being heavily criti cized by the so- 
called ‘cultur al ist’ school of kinship research 
(ibid.). Scholars such as David Schneider 
( 1968 ,  1984 ) argued that kinship is primar-
ily based on shared mean ings and symbols, 
and criti cized western schol ars for assum-
 K
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
construc tion of her own queer/hybrid/
anti-Oedipal and post- patri archal family of 
mater ial- semi otic ﬁ gur a tions ( Haraway 
2004 ). Starting with the ﬁ gure of the cyborg 
in the 1980s, she later proclaimed her 
kinship to OncoMouse,™ that is to say a 
genet ic ally modi ﬁ ed mouse that carries 
a gene which increases its suscept ib il ity 
to cancer. Haraway also bonds with 
Plutonium–239 – a ﬁ ssile isotope created in 
nuclear react ors and used for the produc-
tion of nuclear weapons. Th is social bond is 
not postu lated along the clas sical line of 
social contract theory, based on the patri-
archal exchange of women in hetero sexual 
marriage and family struc ture, but rather 
by sharing with these post- natural crit ters 
a sense of agency and mater ial intim ate 
inter con nec tions through complex shared 
histor ies ( Haraway 1997 ). Haraway has 
written two pion eer ing books on compan-
ion species ( 2003 ,  2008 ), in which she high-
lights signi ﬁ c ant other ness as a product ive 
rela tion that further blurs the human/non- 
human, 
organic/tech no lo gical, 
nature/
culture binar ies by showing how diﬀ er ent 
species co- consti tute each other through 
mutual connec tions. 
 Haraway’s work on kin- making (or 
‘kinning’) is indebted to femin ist science 
and tech no logy studies, femin ist takes on 
biology, science ﬁ ction, scientiﬁ c fabu la-
tion and indi gen ous schol ar ship ( Haraway 
2016 ). Staying true to her polit ics of care -
ful and respons ible world ing, Haraway 
aims to re- claim kin and kinship as non- 
gene a lo gical tech no logy of becom ing- with 
and render ing each other capable, detached 
from notions of inher it ance and ances try. 
For Haraway kinning is a matter of making 
persons – not neces sar ily indi vidu als or 
humans – that are capable of living and 
dying well with each other in a ‘thick pres-
ence’. In other words, she high lights the 
prac tice of rela tion al ity that goes beyond 
Anthropos, that is focused on staying in 
prox im ity to strange ness, thus opening up 
space for partial recu per a tion and ‘getting 
on together’ (ibid). 
 Such kinships, Haraway argues, are made 
not autopoi et ic ally but sym- chthon ic ally 
and sym- poiet ic ally, without tran scend ental 
belief or (poten tially equally tran scend-
ental) cynicism or indiﬀ er ence. Kinships are 
not without trauma (think of the painful 
histor ies of domes t iﬁ c a tion, colon iz a tion, 
imper i al ism, slavery and other forms of 
exploit a tion), nor are they completely open 
– they include some and exclude others, 
and thus must be formed with atten tion to 
complex histor ical ties and situ ated ness, 
resist ing tempta tion to gener al ize too easily 
either in the direc tion of common human-
ity or multis pe cies collect ives. 
 Haraway’s stance, perhaps most clearly 
reﬂ ec ted in the slogan ‘make kin, not 
babies!’, should be read not as against- life, 
but rather as a non- natal ist, anti- capit al ist, 
anti- anthro po centric 
ethical 
call 
for 
sustain able forms of living. Drawing on 
indi gen ous thought that proposes non- 
mono gam ous, inter spe cies kinships as a 
mode of claim ing  each other (see, for 
instance,  TallBear 2011 ,  2013 ,  2016 ), 
Haraway urges the inven tion of new ways 
of prolif er at ing other- than-natal kin, while 
simul tan eously ﬁ ght ing the colo ni al ist, 
racist, xeno phobic and miso gyn ist state 
policies of popu la tion control. As she 
herself writes, resist ance to Anthropos and 
Capital calls for kinnov at ors that acknow-
ledge that ‘babies should be rare, nurtured 
and precious; and kin should be abund ant, 
unex pec ted, endur ing, and precious’ (ibid.). 
 See also Anthropocene and Chthulucene; 
Animism; 
Feminist 
Posthumanities; 
Naturecultures; Symbiogenesis.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
KIN 
aspects, since famil ies were seen as rele-
g ated to the domestic, private sphere and 
of little polit ical signi ﬁ c ance ( Carsten 
2008 ).   
 2. See, for instance,  Collier and Yanagisako 
1987 ,  Gailey 1987 ,  Ginsburg 1989 , 
 Martin 1987 ,  Rapp 1982 ,  Rubin 1975 , 
 Ortner and Whitehead 1981 ,  Strathern 
1988 ,  Weiner 1976 .   
 3. Such modi ﬁ ed in vitro fertil iz a tion ( IVF ) 
method has recently been approved in 
the  UK : see James Gallagher, ‘ UK 
approves three- person babies’,  BBC News , 
24 February, http://www.bbc.com/news/
health–31594856 [accessed 29 November 
2016].   
 4. See  Edwards and Salazar 2009 ;  Kroløkke 
et al. 2015 ;  Riggs and Peel 2016 . 
 Goda Klumbytė
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Africa; the drown ing of 300 people oﬀ  
Lampedusa in October 2013; and the death 
of 700 migrants in a ship wreck oﬀ  the 
Libyan coast in April 2015. Th e litany can 
go on. But Lampedusa is not an atro city 
exhib i tion. Getting behind the ‘border 
spec tacle’ played out on this fated island 
requires an analysis of the forces and stakes 
at play in the global poli cing of human 
mobil ity and the remak ing of territ ory 
impli cit in such control. 
 Lampedusa is an iconic site within a 
wider geography of border control that has 
taken shape at least since the appear ance 
of the ‘boat people’ in the wake of the 
Vietnam War in the mid–1970s. Th is is an 
elusive and mobile geography, which is in 
no way limited to the ‘open wounds’ 
( heridas abier tas ) in which, as Gloria 
Anzaldúa writes, ‘the  Th ird World grates 
against the ﬁ rst and  bleeds ’ (Anzaldúa 
1987: 3). Sure, such sites as the  US –
Mexican border or the north ern border of 
Australia are hot and relat ively stable spots 
for any attempt to map this geography. But 
the global multi plic a tion of migrat ory and 
escape routes has been matched both by 
multi far i ous attempts to extern al ize the 
control of these borders and by a prolif er a-
tion of limits and holding zones around 
and within national and regional spaces 
outside of the ‘Global North’. Th e ‘Rohingya 
refugee crisis’ of May and June 2015, which 
involved Th ailand, Malaysia, Indonesia 
and the Philippines, is just a recent 
reminder of this. 
 LAMPEDUSA  
 Lampedusa is a borderzone – geolo gic ally 
Africa, polit ic ally Europe. Part of Italy 
since its uniﬁ c a tion, the island has since 
the early 2000s become a hot spot – a 
switch point and holding bay for migrants 
attempt ing the deadly cross ing of the 
Mediterranean from North Africa to 
Europe. Th is passage has a long history. 
Before the form a tion of the European 
Union, the move ment of people across the 
Mediterranean followed seasonal labour 
patterns. Only in the wake of the Schengen 
accords was this motion rendered ‘illegal’. 
Contrary to the rhet oric of emer gency, 
which attrib utes the route’s leth al ness to 
random inﬂ uxes of migrants, the danger of 
cross ing was augmen ted at this point. A 
series of stark admin is trat ive meas ures 
tangled the human passage from Africa to 
Lampedusa with the border between life 
and death. 
 Th e head lines and events are well 
known: the stand- oﬀ  follow ing the rescue 
of thirty- seven migrants by the  Cap 
Anamur  in 2004; the forced return of 
African migrants from Lampedusa to 
Libya under a secret agree ment reached by 
the Italian govern ment; the eﬀ orts of the 
 EU and  UNHCR to involve ‘third coun-
tries’ in asylum prac tices; the destruc tion 
by ﬁ re of an over crowded holding centre in 
2009; the arrival of 48,000 migrants on 
Lampedusa follow ing the Arab revolu tions 
of 2011; the involve ment of the European 
border agency Frontex in the surveil lance 
 L
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
LAMPEDUSA 
abjec tion where the ‘human’ is continu-
ously tested, worked upon and reframed. 
Death is oft en anonym ous at the border, 
partic u larly but not only in mari time 
border scapes. Even when names are 
assigned to bodies, the prevail ing image is 
one of an indis tinct mass of corpses, well 
beyond the threshold of indi vidu al ity. Th e 
aware ness of this under lies one of the most 
power ful works produced on Lampedusa, 
the short ﬁ lm  Asmat – Nomi  by Dagmawi 
Yimer ( 2014 ), where the victims of the 
ship wreck of 3 October 2013 are 
mentioned by their names, one by one. 
 Border and mobil ity control have 
become priv ileged sites for human it arian 
inter ven tion, be it for estab lished inter-
national insti tu tions like  UNHCR or 
 NGO s and other hetero gen eous actors. 
Th e inter twin ing of human it arian logics 
with concerns regard ing ‘secur ity’ and 
economic valor iz a tion of the ‘human 
capital’ of people on the move is a deﬁ n ing 
char ac ter istic of many emer ging border 
and migra tion regimes. In this assemblage 
of govern mental ration al it ies, which is 
not adequately grasped by a focus on 
‘excep tion’, national states continue to be 
import ant actors while being continu ously 
compelled to nego ti ate their sover eign 
power with inter na tional legal orders and 
global players like the International 
Organization for Migration. ‘Biopolitics’ 
(under stood as an attempt to stop, select-
ively ﬁ lter and channel people on the 
move) appears here as struc tur ally artic-
ulated with the ‘necro pol it ics’ of ship-
wrecks, drown ing and asphyxi ation in 
trucks. Gender, class and race, ‘skills’, 
culture and reli gion are continu ously at 
stake in this artic u la tion of biopol it ics and 
necro pol it ics, which crosses the ﬁ gure of 
the human, produ cing new hier arch ies and 
new bound ar ies within it. 
 Borderzones like the one surround ing 
Lampedusa set the condi tions for the 
oper a tions of multi far i ous actors, who take 
the illeg al iz a tion of border cross ing as a 
chance for busi ness. ‘Traﬃ  ckers’ and ‘smug-
glers’ are oft en presen ted as respons ible for 
the inhuman treat ment of migrants and 
refugees as well as for their death. Images 
of ‘slave trade’ and ‘inden ture’ are invoked 
with regard to their oper a tions. What is 
usually not mentioned is that the spaces 
and condi tions in which these actors 
operate are not created by them but by 
polit ical decisions and the working of 
speciﬁ c border and migra tion regi mens. 
And, equally import antly, the paral lel with 
the trans port of bonded labour erases a 
crucial diﬀ er ence – that is, the fact that 
migrants and refugees, in most cases,  want 
to cross borders and are not compelled to 
do so. While there is a persist ent reality of 
‘forced migra tion’ which deserves crit ical 
invest ig a tion, this is true for instance for 
people cross ing the Mediterranean Sea, as 
appar ent in the so- called ‘migra tion crisis’ 
of summer 2015. 
 Besides being spaces of control and 
selec tion, viol ence, death and abjec tion, 
borderzones are also sites of resist ance 
where a kind of element ary search for 
freedom clashes with a control machine 
predic ated upon the imper at ives of secur-
ity, economic valor iz a tion and human-
itarian manage ment of mobil ity. Th e 
geography of border control is oft en chal-
lenged and tested by the power and dynam-
ics of mass migra tion. In the European 
‘crisis’ of the summer of 2015, the relev ance 
of Lampedusa within this geography was 
itself chal lenged and displaced by the 
opening up of new migrat ory routes (most 
notably through the Greek islands and the 
‘Western Balkans’). We have been confron-
ted with a multi plic a tion of sites, which 
rapidly became iconic for the conﬂ icts and 
tensions related with migra tion – from the
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Serbia, to name just two of them. 
 Already, aft er the arrival of thou sands 
of Tunisian migrants from Tunisia aft er the 
end of the Ben Ali regime in 2011, their 
further move ment through out Europe was 
connec ted with a kind of ‘travel’ of the name 
Lampedusa to very centres of the Euro -
pean space. A ‘collect ive of Tunisians from 
Lampedusa in Paris’ squat ted in a public 
build ing, while ‘Lampedusa in Hamburg’ 
and ‘Lampedusa in Berlin’ became the names 
of import ant campaigns and migrants’ strug-
gles in Germany. Th is was a power ful anti-
cip a tion of what happened in the summer 
of 2015, when the tensions and conﬂ icts 
that the border regime (and its ‘spec tacle’) 
should purportedly ‘contain’ and manage at 
the margins of the European space penet-
rated into its very centre, through the stub-
born ness of migrants, the commit ment of 
their activ ist support ers and a signi ﬁ c ant 
move ment of solid ar ity within the ‘public 
opinion’ of several European coun tries. 
 ‘Leave this Europe where they are never 
done talking of Man, yet murder men 
every where they ﬁ nd them.’ Th ese famous 
words taken from the last pages of  Th e 
Wretched of the Earth by Frantz Fanon 
( 2001 : 251) have displa cing and uncanny 
reson ances when read against the back-
ground of these events. What we are 
confron ted with are masses of dispos-
sessed people, profoundly hetero gen eous 
in their compos i tion, heading towards 
Europe and at the same time chal len ging it 
to account for its imper ial past, implic a tion 
in the wars at its borders and for the 
massacre of the human which is struc
 tur ally related to the every day working of 
its border and migra tion regime. Th ese 
move ments and struggles of migra tion 
have a deep polit ical nature insofar as they 
chal lenge the internal limits, borders and 
hier arch ies which struc ture the European 
space, while at the same time point ing 
to the need to reor gan ize the rela tions 
of Europe with its multiple ‘outsides’. 
Th ere is a slogan that was oft en heard in 
Lampedusa in the past years and that 
reson ated across Europe in the summer of 
2015:  we are humans . It is a slogan that has 
a long history in anti- colo nial and anti- 
racist struggles, for instance in African-
American move ments in the  USA . If we 
pit it against what we called, echoing 
Fanon, the massacre of the human connec-
ted to the working of border and migra-
tion regimes we begin to get a sense of the 
radical stakes that connect the tensions 
surround ing mobil ity in our global present 
with the muta tions of the human. 
 Th ese tensions and muta tions are clearly 
not amen able to easy resol u tion. Th ey are 
subject to radical alter a tions in space and 
time, and vari able connec tions between 
the geolo gical and polit ical. Th at the claim 
 to be human emerges as a rally ing cry 
among the most vulner able of mobile 
subjects tells us some thing about crit ical 
idioms that trouble the distinc tion between 
the human and non- human. Whether these 
idioms celeb rate tech no lo gical pros thesis, 
explore the envir on mental consequences of 
human excep tion al ism, or assert the inde-
pend ence of objects from human thought 
and percep tion, they must at the very least 
reckon with the poignancy of this  all too 
human polit ics. At stake is an urgent need 
to rethink our under stand ing of borders, 
both epistem o lo gical and geograph ical, and 
the role they play in violent and discrim in-
at ory expul sions and prac tices of diﬀ er en-
tial inclu sion. Lampedusa is the very icon 
of this respons ib il ity. 
 See also Camp; Anonymity; Expulsions; 
In-Human. 
 Sandro Mezzadra and 
Brett Neilson
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
LEAKS AND STINGS 
 Leaks and stings oﬀ er us a way of rethinking 
circu la tion in a posthu man condi tion. 
Leaks emanate from both mater ial and 
inform a tion 
infra struc tures, 
bypassing 
‘normal’ or author ized chan nels of circu la-
tion. Media leaks refer to unanti cip ated or 
delib er ate disclos ures of priv ileged inform-
a tion by a range of actors: rivals, activ ists 
claim ing public interest, transna tional 
groups commit ted to trans par ency, network 
manip u la tion. Data leaks may emerge from 
soft  ware plat forms, either by ‘malfunc tion’ 
or through hacker attacks. ‘Th e leak’, say 
Mathew Fuller and Andrew Goﬀ ey, ‘is 
the emis sion liber ated from its proper place 
by an act of omis sion, or neglect of right 
contain ment’ (2012: 100). 
 Stings used be a priv ilege of the state, 
where police gathered evid ence to record 
but actu ally not provoke crim inal acts. In 
paral lel police entrap ment records staged 
encoun ters with hidden media devices, 
whereby the target is induced to commit an 
incrim in at ing act. In the contem por ary 
media land scape, this police tech no logy 
has been deployed by activ ists, journ al ists 
and private indi vidu als, who use hidden 
media devices to entrap indi vidu als or hack 
into mobile phones of celebrit ies as in the 
recent cases in the  UK . Th e ‘private’ media 
sting signi ﬁ c antly trans formed the older 
police tech no logy: it initi ated new ﬁ elds of 
circu la tion, and opened larger ques tions 
of the public interest and sover eignty, as 
systems of secrecy, censor ship and control 
face new chal lenges. As tech niques of 
disrupt ing author ized circu la tion both 
leaks and stings oﬀ er us ways of think ing 
about infra struc ture and circu la tion. 
 As phys ical forms that govern the 
engines of circu la tion, infra struc tures typic-
ally bring together popu la tions, commod it-
ies, money and prac tices of making and 
unmak ing. Infrastructures, says the anthro-
po lo gist Brian Larkin, ‘shape the nature of a 
network, the speed and direc tion of its 
move ment, its tempor al it ies, and its vulner-
ab il ity to break down’ (2013: 328) Igor 
Kopytoﬀ  ( 1986 ) has spoken of the many 
‘lives’ of commod it ies as they move in and 
out of circu la tion. Media objects like audio 
and video also take on multiple lives as they 
move in diverse time–space conﬁ g ur a tions. 
In events linked to stings and leaks, a 
premium is placed on the moment of live- 
ness: the burst of aﬀ ect ive energy when the 
inform a tion is released in the public domain, 
designed to multiply the polit ical eﬀ ects of 
the act. Th is is oft en not the end of the story, 
as media moves to other envir on ments and 
plat forms. Leaks and stings are part of a 
gener at ive move ment, where prac tices, 
objects and people attach them selves to 
chan ging assemblages. Th is assemblage is a 
dynamic media ecology, which is not a stable 
arrange ment of tech no lo gies and envir on-
ments, but rather is product ive, result ing in 
new inter ven tions or ‘space- times’ ( Deleuze 
1990 : 176). Once the initial event has taken 
place we see a constant redis tri bu tion of 
forces and new plat forms and spaces emerge: 
polit ical scandal, activ ist mobil iz a tion or a 
judi cial event like a court case. 
 Th is ‘loop’ shapes much of contem por-
ary media circu la tion, wherein media 
objects move in and out of infra struc tures, 
attach them selves to new plat forms of 
polit ical- aesthetic action, and are drawn to 
or depart from the spec tac u lar time of 
media events. Th is drive marks the turbu-
lent, dynamic ecology of stings/leaks, with 
chan ging combin a tions of prot ag on ists, 
tech no lo gies and spaces: tele vi sion news-
rooms, online plat forms, police stations, 
govern ment 
oﬃ  ces, 
courts, 
enquiry 
commis sions, demon stra tions and activ ist 
forums. 
 Michael Warner ( 2002 ) points to the 
‘fruit ful perversity’ of all acts of modern 
publi city. Once initi ated, these acts
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
risk of dispersal, misuse and escape. 
 Th e older forms of govern ment al ity 
priv ileged partic u lar (legal) sites of media 
exhib i tion and consump tion through 
regu lat ory systems. Today new forms 
of unau thor ized publi city have actively 
destabil ized this regime and fed into new 
loops of circu la tion. Media has become the 
infra struc tural condi tion of life rather 
than (just) enclosed in distinct, regu lated 
sites like ﬁ lm and tele vi sion. What we 
see is a new condi tion of aﬀ ect driven 
media modern ity in most parts of the 
world today ( Berlant 2011 ). Th us stings 
and leaks oﬀ er a window into the re- 
arrange ments of sover eignty in the 
posthu man condi tion: equally they are 
also co- conspir at ors in the ‘post- public 
sphere 
public’ 
( Berlant 
2011 : 
223). 
Evacuated from the mythic of stranger 
soci ab il ity, the new circu lat ory loop spans 
public–private, consump tion/polit ics, and 
surveil lance/counter- surveil lance. 
 Michael Warner has pointed out that 
when public discourses move away from 
set audi ences, it also ‘puts at risk the 
concrete world that consti tutes its condi-
tion of possib il ity’ (2002: 109). Leaks and 
stings reﬂ ect this tension between acts of 
publi city and their possib il ity, as user- 
driven infra struc tures mobil ize police 
tech no lo gies, 
disrupt ing 
engines 
of 
circulation. Equally, these disrup tions 
of infra struc ture may gener ate a ‘poetics’. 
Th ese may range from sensorial- polit ical 
strategies of  NGO s, anti- govern ment 
move ments ( Maclagan 2012 ) and trans-
par ency groups, as well as indi vidual acts 
by newly media enabled popu la tions in the 
non-Western world. 
 See also Anonymity; Contemporary, the; 
Informatic Opacity. 
 Ravi Sundaram 
 LITERATURE OF LIBERATION  
 Liberation, like love, is never abstract. It 
refers to rela tion ships of mastery and 
subjug a tion; it refers to polit ical mastery, 
to class and gender mastery, to human 
forms of abuse. But there is more. For Peter 
Singer, for example, it is a concept that 
involves all sentient beings. In a famous 
book titled  Animal Liberation (1975), 
he strongly attacked ‘species ism,’ a way 
of discrim in at ing against non- human 
animals – killing them, exploit ing them, 
treat ing them as if they were mere objects, 
and simply ignor ing their capa city to  feel , 
whether pleas ure or pain. Drawing atten-
tion to the suppressed suﬀ er ing of non- 
human beings, Singer soli cited their 
acknow ledg ment as our part ners in the 
moral world. Other import ant thinkers, 
like for example Val Plumwood ( 1993 , 
 2002 ), took a step further and spoke 
against the ‘hyper sep ar a tion’ prac tices of 
‘the logic of Othering’ (2002: 117) that 
subjug ate not only humans and sentient 
animals, but whatever is not a hege monic 
subject. Th e kind of liber a tion Plumwood 
envi sioned was there fore a liber a tion from 
the onto lo gical and moral systems of 
mastery that frame our social as well as 
ecolo gical rela tion ships. All domin ated 
subjects – enslaved people and enslaved 
natures alike – are enclosed, for Plumwood, 
into a regime of ‘moral and cultural blind-
ness’ (2002: 118) through which ‘the 
Other’s inde pend ent agency and value is 
down graded and denied’ (2002: 105). Th is 
radic al ized ‘hyper sep ar a tion,’ 
however, 
creates in the domin ant subjects the 
illu sion of their ‘disembed ded ness,’ thus 
block ing their own survival. Th ese issues 
also belongs to the tradi tion of post co lo-
nial studies, which has in recent times 
congealed with ecocriti cism in the analysis 
of how the rhet oric of ‘devel op ment al ism’ 
and glob al iz a tion aﬀ ects exploited humans,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
LITERATURE OF LIBERATION 
animals and lands ( Huggan and Tiﬃ  n 
2010 ;  DeLoughrey and Handley 2011 ). 
 It is clear that the only way to grant 
inde pend ence to oppressed people and 
beings – the only way to liber ate them – is 
to give them a voice, and to  see their stories. 
But there is another, even more onto lo gic-
ally radical form of liber a tion. Th is is the 
liber a tion of  things  from their silence, the 
consid er a tion of non- humans as ‘full- 
ﬂ edged actors’ ( Latour 1999 : 174) in a 
‘polit ical ecology’ which involves all mater-
ial beings, and which has been artic u lated 
by authors such as Bruno Latour, Jane 
Bennett, Karen Barad, Bill Brown, Ian 
Bogost, 
William 
Connolly, 
Roberto 
Esposito and Philippe Descola. Liberating 
things from their silence is not merely 
an exer cise of human creativ ity, but an 
essen tial act of ecolo gical imagin a tion. 
Resonating with this discourse, liter ary 
imagin a tion can be a way to over come the 
bound ar ies of subjectiv ity, and to eman-
cip ate storytelling from the stand point of 
the indi vidual ego. Th is idea is eﬀ ect ively 
expressed by Italo Calvino in the ﬁ nal lines 
of his  Six Memos for the Next Millennium : 
 Th ink what it would be to have a work 
conceived from outside the  self , a work 
that would let us escape the limited 
perspect ive of the indi vidual ego, not only 
to enter into selves like our own, but to 
give speech to that which has no language, 
to the bird perch ing on the edge of the 
gutter, to the tree in spring and the tree in 
the fall, to stone, to cement, to plastic . . . 
Was this not perhaps what Ovid was 
aiming at, when he wrote about the 
continu ity of forms? And what Lucretius 
was aiming at when he iden ti ﬁ ed himself 
with that nature common to each and 
every thing? 
 2009 [1988]: 124 
 Like Calvino, authors and thinkers such as 
Ovid, Lucretius, Spinoza, Darwin, Goethe, 
Blake, Mary Wollstonecraft , Kafk a, Jorge 
Luis Borges and many others demon strate 
how the human is not the apical element of 
an ordered creation, but rather an expres-
sion of the world’s morpho lo gical irony. In 
their own ﬁ elds and styles, they provide 
creat ive tools that liber ate us from the 
obses sions of anthro po centrism, pulling 
the human back into the wider horizon of 
being. More in general, the authors and 
genres enter ing this lineage of imagin a tion 
– from Lucretius to Philip K. Dick and 
Margaret Atwood, from magical realism to 
science ﬁ ction, from toxic auto bi o graph ies 
to cli- ﬁ  – have some thing in common: they 
help readers (and critics) to build narra-
t ives about the world that are thera peutic 
against the isol a tion of the human self. In 
this dimen sion of inter sect ing players and 
pres ences, recog niz ing ‘imper sonal stories’ 
– stories of land, of things, of hybrid ity, of 
processes – is in fact as import ant for a 
healthy rela tion ship to our world as recog-
niz ing personal stories, stories of people. 
Th ese imper sonal stories embody and 
express many of the dynam ics that inﬂ u-
ence our life: like the trans- corpor eal 
exchanges of substances and the trans- 
local ity of envir on mental processes show, 
now more than ever,  the imper sonal is 
polit ical . Th is is even truer if we consider 
that, as posthu man ist thinkers insist, the 
imper sonal agency of a vast array of ‘others’ 
is also crucial to our very exist ence. In a 
profound sense, mater i ally as well as 
discurs ively, it is the non- human that 
makes us human ( Haraway 2008 ;  Braidotti 
2013 ;  Marchesini 2002 ). 
 By creat ing new vocab u lar ies apt to 
show, inter pret and repres ent the world in 
its multi pli city of players and stories, litera-
t ure has a power to act as a priv ileged means 
of liber a tion and of eman cip a tion for both 
the human and for its ‘other’, espe cially if 
considered in the frame work of a an 
ecology of culture ( Zapf 2016 ). Th e emer-
gence of these cultural tools is decis ive,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
we really  see  things. Whether on exploited 
humans, animals or other natures, oppres-
sion is far more fero cious when it is 
unspoken, unac know ledged,  unso cial ized . 
Th e obvious reason for it is that it is more 
diﬃ   cult to see (and recog nize) things and 
beings that have no name, than things and 
beings whose exist ence is ampli ﬁ ed through 
words. Seeing Napoleon’s ghost on horse-
back is much easier than seeing a dying 
ecosys tem, if you are not able to read its 
signs, mean ings and stories. Helping us to 
connect words with the world, liter ary 
narrat ives are poten tial means of liber a tion. 
Literary imagin a tion accepts in fact ‘the 
chal lenge of render ing visible occluded, 
sprawl ing webs of inter con nec ted ness’ 
( Nixon 2011 : 45). As Rob Nixon has writ-
ten: ‘In a world permeated by insi di ous, yet 
unseen or imper cept ible viol ence, imagin-
at ive writing can help make the unap par ent 
appear, making it access ible and tangible by 
human iz ing drawn- out threats inac cess ible 
to the imme di ate senses’ (2011: 15). 
 Literature, as Calvino also said, ‘is 
neces sary to polit ics above all when it gives 
a voice to whatever is without a voice’ 
(1986: 98). Th is can mean endless things. 
Literature can give a voice to the voice less, 
the dispos sessed, the disem powered; and it 
can give a voice to those who cannot speak, 
but can nonethe less feel pleas ure or pain; 
liter at ure can give a voice to natural beings, 
elements, phenom ena, processes; it can 
give voice to the ‘storied matter’ of the 
world. Stimulating the imagin a tion of new 
dis- anthro po centric onto lo gies ( Cohen 
2015b ), liter at ure can create bridges – both 
ethical and cognit ive – toward  others , 
thus opening our eyes and ears in front 
of the many worlds that, with us and 
notwith stand ing us, inhabit our world. A 
liter at ure of liber a tion is there fore a liter a-
t ure that contrib utes to creat ing a posthu-
man imagin a tion, namely a way of seeing 
the rela tion ship between ‘us’ and ‘them’ in 
terms of permeab il ity, of exchange and co- 
pres ence. If we want to live  real ist ic ally we 
cannot pretend that our dimen sion of 
exist ence is separ ated from theirs. What 
this liter at ure helps us under stand is that 
there is no ‘ours’ and ‘theirs’: all these 
things, all these living and non- living 
beings share with us a common terrain of 
exist ence, and enter into a rela tion ship 
with our life and with the life of the world. 
 Considered in its recent devel op ments, 
liter ary criti cism – and ecocriti cism in 
partic u lar – displays a constant traject ory: 
from issues related to human subjectiv ity 
(for example exper i ence of or encoun ters 
with land scapes, places or non- human 
others) the focus has shift ed to processes, 
collect ives and entan gle ments (for example, 
global warming, species extinc tion, trans- 
corpor eal ﬂ uxes of toxins). In other words, 
liter ary studies too have been import ant 
players in moving the human it ies’ move 
 beyond  the human, thus paving the way to 
the posthu man Humanities ( Braidotti 
2013 ). Th e func tion of crit ical approaches 
and prac tices such as posthu man ism, mater-
ial femin isms, ecoma ter i al ism and mater ial 
ecocriti cism is crucial to this chal lenge. Not 
only do they favour post- anthro po centric 
narrat ives, thus redeem ing the stories of the 
imper sonal but, in so doing, they also allow 
us to see  more of the part we humans play in 
this vast inter sec tional scenery. In other 
words, by freeing the ‘imper sonal’ from its 
struc tural silence, these crit ical meth od o lo-
gies enable ways to redress human oppres-
sion, thus becom ing part of a wide and 
artic u lated project of  liber a tion liter acy . 
 See also Animacies; (Material) Eco-
criticism; Ecomaterialism; Non- human 
Agency; Storied Matter; Ontological Turn; 
Posthuman Literature and Criticism. 
 Serenella Iovino
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
LOCALITY/NON- SEPAR AB IL ITY 
 LOCALITY/NON- SEPAR AB IL ITY  
 Th e posthu man turn has trans formed and 
re- envi sioned nomadic subjectiv ity through 
the radical re- artic u la tion of the notion of 
loca tion neither as a univer sal ground nor 
as a reiﬁ c a tion of diﬀ er ence, but as a spatio- 
temporal speciﬁ city that mater i ally co- 
produces the subject ( Braidotti 2006b : 199). 
Th is shift  has become partic u larly relev ant 
for research on territories, mobil ity and 
geo- polit ical rela tions as the constel la tions 
of 
revolu tion ary 
social 
move ments 
spreading across time and space with 
increas ing speed bypass phys ical and 
cultural borders. Capitalism creates a unify-
ing, arti ﬁ  cial ground ing, a master- code or 
common language that allows objects 
and ideas to be compared against each 
other under the rules of the market. Th is 
‘over cod ing’ ( Deleuze and Guattari 1987 : 
42) is not only merging, hier arch iz ing and 
strat i fy ing objects, ideas and indi vidu als, 
but is also allowing socio- polit ical and 
economic prob lems to surface glob ally 
almost instant an eously, only to be ampli ﬁ ed 
by their co- depend ence on the univer sal 
Capital. Th e paral lel devel op ment of 
network tech no lo gies has led to the tight en-
ing of time inter vals, spread ing events and 
ideas faster than ever before in a non- linear 
fashion. Th e simul tan eous homo gen iz a tion 
of space and the abrupt discon tinu it ies of 
time brought by networked cultures render 
the drawing of a coherent carto graphy of 
these resist ance move ments harder and 
harder to trace. Th e ‘entangled gene a lo gies’ 
( Barad 2007 : 389) of these move ments 
cannot corres pond to a sequen tial reading 
that sees them as a domino eﬀ ect as their 
emer gence is non- linear. A tracing of the 
condi tions that made these move ments and 
events possible would require a renewed 
focus on their rela tional char ac ter rather 
than their reading as an all-encompassing 
narrat ive. 
 Our Newtonian notions of abso lute 
time and space have to be revised taking 
into account rela tional models elab or ated 
by advance ments in quantum physics and 
math em at ics. Notions such as abso lute 
distance and size in Cartesian space can be 
replaced by prox im ity/near ness and ratios 
of density in a topo lo gical (non- trivial) 
space. Th e strict categorization of spatial 
models, 
purely 
based 
on 
nested 
geographical scales ranging from global, 
regional and local together with the 
sequential account of time are rendered 
obsolete through the commonness that 
resistance movements generate. From 
the anti- auster ity riots to the Occupy 
move ment to the Arab Spring and to 
the hundreds of student protests, the 
rise of these social move ments can 
only reveal the enmeshed socio- polit ical 
prop er ties of the intra- connec ted ness of 
scale. A carto graphic mapping of these 
move ments would resemble a Deleuzean 
section ( DeLanda 2002 : 125) that reduces 
the events to their purely diagram matic 
assemblage, elim in at ing quan ti ﬁ  able data 
to its vectorial forces as a way to cut 
through a continu ous dynamic system 
project ing a discrete tracing of its rela tions. 
Th e rela tional char ac ter of this model 
indic ates the blurred lines on which none 
could claim local ity or nonloc al ity. Th is 
disprove ment of Einstein’s local realism 
through ‘spooky action at a distance’ exper-
i ments, in which two particles have 
entangled states, inﬂ u en cing each other 
instant an eously (faster than the speed of 
light) in spite of the distance between 
them, suggests that non- local ity could 
exist in a continu ous space without the 
separ ab il ity required by distance. Th e 
prin ciple that an object is directly aﬀ ected 
only by its imme di ate surround ings and 
that any meas ure ments observed are 
independent of the exper i mental setup was 
proven inad equate; entangled particles
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
LOCALITY/NON- SEPAR AB IL ITY
could inﬂ u ence each other at a distance 
instant an eously. In fact, quantum entan-
gle ments and rela tional models show that 
there is no separ ab il ity; no external posi-
tion that can be maintained. Th e only 
extern al ity can be that of the rela tions that 
make things emerge. Th is system, however, 
does not dismiss the reality of local ity. 
Events, places and borders are both real 
and distin guish able, as the ongoing refugee 
crisis, 
environmental 
tragedies, 
and 
political struggles still taking place remind 
us. As Karen Barad suggests, our way of 
knowing and distin guish ing the local ity of 
‘phenom ena’ is purely epistem o lo gical 
and ‘enacted’ and does not auto mat ic ally 
cancel out their onto lo gical insepar ab il ity 
(Barad 2007:128). 
 Within these jerky traject or ies, a post- 
human, pre- indi vidual, univer sal aﬀ ect 
appears to reson ate within diﬀ er ent ethni-
cit ies, cultures and geograph ical scales 
taking local mani fest a tions accord ing to 
the speciﬁ cit ies of the mater i al iz a tion of 
its time and space. Th is aﬀ ect is neither 
fully expressed indi vidu ally nor is it repre-
s ent a tional as it emerges as a mood: non- 
tele olo gical and direc tional rather than 
inten tional. Its local mani fest a tions dis-
tinguish and deﬁ ne the speciﬁ cit ies of its 
condi tions of emer gence. It can act instant-
an eously and at the same time its eﬀ ects 
can be slow and gradual, ferment ing and 
trans form ing vectors of change, leading to 
new ‘lines of ﬂ ight’. Th is posthu man con-
dition clearly under lines that the local ity 
of events is real and epistem o lo gical. It is 
an ‘agen tial cut’ ( Barad 2007 : 140) that is 
iter at ively enacted and in this way opens 
up novel ways of knowing. As we remain 
onto lo gic ally entangled and insep ar able, it 
is crucial to refor mu late a new solid ar ity 
that can trans form our ethical models and 
the way we aﬀ ect and are being aﬀ ected. 
 See 
also 
Commutation 
Ontology; 
Ecopathy; Neo/New Materialism; Nomadic 
Sensibility. 
 Lila Athanasiadou
MAKEHUMAN 
 Software: We’ve Got a 
Situation Here  
 MakeHuman is ‘3D computer graph ics 
middle ware designed for the proto typ ing 
of photo real istic humanoids’ and has 
gained visib il ity and popular ity over time. 4 
It is actively developed by a collect ive of 
program mers, algorithms, model lers and 
academ ics and used by amateur anim at ors 
to proto type model ling, by natural history 
museums for creat ing exhib i tion displays, 
by engin eers to test multi- camera systems 
and by game developers for sketch ing 
bespoke char ac ters. 5   Developers and users 
evid ently work together to deﬁ ne and 
codify the condi tions of pres ence for 
virtual bodies in MakeHuman. 6 Since each 
of the agents in this collect ive somehow 
oper ates under the modern regime of 
repres ent a tion, we ﬁ nd the soft  ware full 
of assump tions about the natur al ity of 
perspect ive- based and linear repres ent a-
tions, the essen tial prop er ties of the species 
and so forth. Th e device ful naming of the 
project is a reminder of how the semi otic- 
mater ial secrets of life’s ﬂ ows are strongly 
linked to the way soft  ware repres ents or 
allows bodies to be repres en ted. 7 Th e 
modern subject, deﬁ ned by the freedom to 
make and decide, is trained to self- 
construct under the narciss istic fantasy of 
‘correct’, ‘proper’ or ‘accur ate’ repres ent a-
tions of the self. Th ese virtual bodies 
matter to us because their persist ent 
repres ent a tions cause mirror aﬀ ects and 
eﬀ ects on both sides of the screen.  8 
 MAKEHUMAN  
 MakeHuman is an Open Source soft -
ware  for model ling three- dimen sional 
humanoid 
char ac ters 
( http://www.
make hu man.org ). Th rough its curious 
naming the project evokes the demi urge, 
dream ing of ‘making’ ‘humans’ to resemble 
his own image. Including a concrete soft -
ware object in this gloss ary means address-
ing speciﬁ c entan gle ments of tech no logy, 
repres ent a tion and norm ativ ity: a potent 
triangle that MakeHuman sits in the 
middle of. But it does not only deserve 
our atten tion due to the tech no lo gical 
power of self- repres ent a tion that it 
aﬀ ords. As an Open Source project, it is 
shaped by the condi tions of inter rog a tion 
and trans form ab il ity, guar an teed through 
its license. Like many other F/ LOSS  
projects, MakeHuman is surroun ded by 
a rich constel la tion of textual objects, 
expressed through publicly access ible 
source code, code- comments, bugtrack ers, 
forums and docu ment a tion. 1 Th is porous-
ness facil it ated the shaping of a collect ive 
inquiry, activ ated through exper i ments, 
conver sa tions and medi ations. 2 In collab-
or a tion with archi tects, dancers, trans*-
activ ists, design students, anim at ors and 
others, we are turning MakeHuman into 
a  think ing machine , a device to crit ic ally 
think along phys ical and virtual imagin-
aries. Soft ware is culture and hence soft -
ware- making is world- making. It is a 
means for rela tion al it ies, not a crys tal lized 
cultural end. 3 
 M
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 MakeHuman is ‘middle ware’, a device in 
the middle: a compos i tion machine that 
glues the deli ri ums of the ‘quan ti ﬁ ed self’ to 
that of Hollywood imagery, all of it made 
oper a tional through scientiﬁ c anthro po-
morphic data and the graphic tricks of 
3D-hyper- real render ing. From soft  ware 
devel op ment to char ac ter anim a tion, 
from scientiﬁ c proof to surveil lance, the 
prac tices cross ing through MakeHuman 
produce images, imagin a tions and imagin-
ar ies that are part of a concrete and situated 
cultural assemblage of hetero- patri archal 
posit iv ism and human ism. Found in and 
fed by main stream medi ated repres ent a-
tions, these imagin a tions gener ally align 
with the body stereo types that belong to 
advanced capit al ism and post- colo ni al ist 
Screenshot MakeHuman
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MAKEHUMAN 
para met ers, tight en ing the space of these 
bodies through assump tions of what they 
are supposed to be. Th is risky struc tur a-
tion is based on reduced human ist categor-
ies of ‘propor tion al ity’ and ‘normal ity’. 
Parametric design prom ises inﬁ n ite diﬀ er-
en ti ations but renders them into a mere 
illu sion: obvi ously, not all phys ical bodies 
result ing from the combin a tions would 
look the same, but soft  ware can make that 
happen. Th e sliders provide a machinic 
imagin a tion for util it ari an ized (supposedly 
human) compos it ors, conveni ently cover-
ing up how they func tion through a mix of 
tech nical 
and 
cultural 
norm ativ it ies. 
Aligning what is to be desired with the 
possible, they evid ently mirror the binary 
systems of the modern proposal for the 
world. 10 Th e point is not to ‘ﬁ x’ these prob-
lems; quite the contrary. We exper i mented 
with repla cing default values with random 
numbers, and other ways to inter vene with 
the inner work ings of the tool. But only 
when we started rewrit ing the inter face 
could we see it behav ing diﬀ er ently. 11 
Renaming markers, repla cing them by 
ques tions and descrip tions, by adding 
and subtract ing sliders, the inter face 
became a space for narrat ing through the 
gener at ive process of making possible 
bodies. 
 A second tech nique of repres ent a tion 
at work is that of geomet ric model ling or 
polygon meshes. A mesh consol id ates an 
always- complete collec tion of vertices, 
edges, planes and faces in order to deﬁ ne 
the topo logy of an indi vidu al ized shape. 
Each face of a virtual body is a convex 
polygon; this is common prac tice in 3D 
computer graph ics and simpli ﬁ es the 
complex ity of the calcu la tions needed for 
render ing. Polygon meshes are deeply 
indebted to the Cartesian perspect ive by 
their need for whole ness. It results in a 
ﬁ rm separ a tion of ﬁ rst inside from outside 
and secondly shape or topo logy from 
projec tions. Virtual bodies only look 
‘normal’ because they appear to ﬁ t into that 
complex situ ation.  
 Un- taming the Whole 
 Th e signa ture feature of the MakeHuman 
inter face is a set of hori zontal sliders. For a 
split second, the surpris ing proposal to list 
‘gender’ as a continu ous para meter prom-
ises wild combin a tions. Could it be that 
MakeHuman is a place for imagin ing 
humanoids as subjects in process, as open- 
ended virtual ﬁ gures that have not yet 
mater i alized? But the uncom fort able and 
yet famil iar pres ence of phys ical and 
cultural prop er ties projec ted to the same 
hori zontal scale soon shat ters that promise. 
Th e inter face suggests that the tech nique 
of simply inter pol at ing para met ers labeled 
‘Gender’, ‘Age’, ‘Muscle’, ‘Weight’, ‘Height’, 
‘Proportions’, ‘Caucasian’, ‘African’ and 
‘Asian’ suﬃ  ces to make any repres ent a tion 
of the human body. Th e unmarked 
extremit ies of the para met ers are merely a 
way to outsource norm ativ ity to the user, 
who can only blindly guess the outcomes 
of the algorithmic calcu la tions launched 
by hand ling the sliders. Th e tool invites a 
compar ison between ‘Gender’ and ‘Weight’ 
for example, or to decide on race and 
propor tions through a similar gesture. 
Subtle and less subtle shift s in both textual 
and visual language hint at the trouble of 
main tain ing the one- dimen sion al ity of 
this 3D world- view: ‘Gender’ (not ‘Sex’) 
and ‘Weight’ are labelled in the singu lar but 
‘Proportions’ in plural; ‘Age’ is not expressed 
as ‘Young’ or ‘Old’, but race is made ﬁ nite in 
its intra- iter a tions by naming a limited set 
of options for mixture.  9 
 Further inspec tion reveals that even the 
promise of continu ity and separ a tion is 
based on a trick. Th e actual maths at work 
reveals an extremely limited topo logy 
based on a closed system of inter con nec ted
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
soft  ware objects. Sharing our lack of rever-
ence for the over whelm ing complex it ies of 
digital tech niques and tech no lo gies of 3D 
imaging, we collect ively uncovered its 
disclos ures and played in its cracks. 14 We 
could see the soft  ware iterate between past 
and present cultural paradigms as well as 
between humans and non- humans. Th ese 
virtual bodies co- construc ted through the 
imagin a tion of program mers, algorithms 
and anim at ors call for  other wise embod ied 
others  that suspend the mimick ing of 
‘nature’ to make room for exper i ences 
that are not directly lived, but that deeply 
shape life. 15 
 Our persist ent atten tion to MakeHuman 
being in the middle, situ ated in- between 
various digital prac tices of embod i ment, 
somehow makes collab or a tion between 
perspect ives possible, and pierces its own 
util it arian mesh. Th rough strategies of ‘de- 
famil i ar iz a tion’ the poten ti al it ies of soft -
ware open up: break ing the surface is a 
polit ical gesture that becomes gener at ive, 
provid ing a topo lo gical dynamic that helps 
us exper i ence the import ant pres ence of 
impur it ies in matter–culture continuums.  16 
 Exploring a soft  ware like MakeHuman 
hints at the possib il ity of a polit ics, aesthet-
ics and ethics that is truly gener at ive. To 
provide us with endless a- modern  mestizo , 
an escape from repres ent a tional and agen-
tial norm ativ it ies, soft  ware  CAN and 
 MUST provide the mater ial condi tions 
for wild combin a tions or unsuspec ted 
renders. 17 
 See also Altergorithm; Bodies Politic; 
Informatic Opacity; Otherwise Embodied 
Others; Storied Matter; Trans-Corporeality.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MAKEHUMAN 
 8. 
A code comment in  model ing_modi ﬁ  ers_
desc.json , a ﬁ le that deﬁ nes the modi ﬁ c a-
tions oper ated by the sliders, explains that 
‘Proportions of the human features, oft en 
subject ively referred to as qual it ies of 
beauty (min is unusual, center posi tion is 
average and max is ideal istic propor tions)’, 
 https://bitbucket.org/MakeHuman/
make hu man (version 1.0.2) [accessed 
18 April 2017].   
 9.  human mod i ﬁ erclass.py , a ﬁ le that holds 
the various soft  ware- classes to deﬁ ne 
body 
shapes, 
limits 
the 
‘Ethnic
Modiﬁ er(MacroModiﬁ er) class’ to three 
racial 
para met ers, 
together 
always 
making up a complete set: ‘# We assume 
there to be only 3 ethnic modi ﬁ  ers. self._
defaultValue = 1.0/3’,  https://bitbucket.
org/MakeHuman/make hu man (version 
1.0.2) [accessed 18 April 2017].  
   10. In response to a user suggest ing making 
the sliders more expli cit (‘It really does not 
really make any sense for a char ac ter to be 
anything other than 100% male or female, 
but then again its more appear ance based 
than actual sex.’), developer Manuel 
Bastioni responds that it is ‘not easy’: ‘For 
example, weight = 0.5 is not a ﬁ xed value. 
It depends by the age, the gender, the 
percent age of muscle and fat, and the 
height. If you are making an adult giant, 
8 ft , fully muscu lar, your 0.5 weight is X . . . 
In other words, it’s not linear’,  http://
bugtracker.make hu man com munity.org/
issues/489 [accessed 18 April 2017].  
   11. MakeHuman is developed in Python, a 
program ming language that is relat ively 
access ible for non- tech nical users and 
does not require compil a tion aft er 
changes to the program are made. 
   12. When the program starts up, a warning 
message is displayed that ‘MakeHuman 
is a char ac ter creation suite. It is designed 
for making anatom ic ally correct humans. 
Parts of this program may contain 
nudity. Do you want to proceed?’ 
 13. Th e  trans*- working ﬁ eld of all medi-
ations is a profan a tion of sacred and 
run the program for any purpose, to study 
how the program works, to redis trib ute 
copies and to improve the program.  
 2. 
In 2014 the asso ci ation for art and media 
Constant 
organ ized 
GenderBlending, 
a work- session to look at the way 
3D-imaging tech no lo gies condi tion social 
read ings and imagin a tions of gender. Th e 
collect ive inquiry contin ued with several 
perform at ive iter a tions and includes 
contri bu tions by Rebekka Eisner, Xavier 
Gorgol, Martino Morandi, Phil Langley 
and Adva Zakai ( http://constantvzw.org/
site/-GenderBlending,190-.html ).  
 3. Th e poten tial of soft  ware as a ‘think ing 
machine’ is that it can activ ate mech-
anisms of know ledge produc tion, of 
not- only-text- based crit ical theory: ‘A 
carto graphy is a theor et ic ally based and 
polit ic ally informed reading of the 
present. Cartographies aim at epistemic 
and ethical account ab il ity by unveil ing 
the power loca tions which struc ture our 
subject- posi tion’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 164). 
  4. ‘MakeHuman is an open source 3D 
computer graph ics soft  ware middle ware 
designed for the proto typ ing of photo 
real istic humanoids. It is developed by 
a community of program mers, artists, 
and academ ics inter ested in 3D model-
ing of char ac ters’,  Wikipedia ,  https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/MakeHuman 
[accessed 18 April 2017]. 
 5. Present 
and 
past 
contrib ut ors 
to 
MakeHuman:  http://www.make hu man.
org/halloﬀ ame.php [accessed 18 April 
2017]. 
 6.  https://en.wiki p e  dia.org/wiki/
MakeHuman#References_and_Related_
Papers [accessed 18 April 2017]. 
 7. Th e Artec3 3D-scanner is sold to 
museums, creat ive labs, forensic insti tu-
tions and plastic surgery clinics alike. 
Th eir collec tion of use- cases shows 
how the market of shapes circu lates 
between bodies, cars and pros thesis: 
 http://www.artec3d.com/applic a tions 
[accessed 18 April 2017].
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
increas ing atten tion to the non- human or 
more- than-human, and the biolo gical and 
ecolo gical dimen sions of life matters, this 
turn has also elicited ques tions about the 
focus of femin ist theor ies. Do mater ial 
femin isms undo or other wise discount 
language, discourse and repres ent a tion as 
tools of power? Is this turn’s espoused 
reori ent a tion towards onto logy a dismissal 
of epistem o logy as a site for ground- 
break ing femin ist schol ar ship? Or even 
more troub lingly, is it a disavowal or for-
get ting of ethics as femin ism’s  raison d’être ? 
What does concern about non- human or 
more- than-human matter have to do with 
the ethical and attend ant polit ical projects 
of femin ism? In this turn, have we not, so 
to speak, lost the femin ist plot? 
 One response to these concerns would 
be the asser tion that mater ial femin isms 
don’t think merely ‘about’ matter. Th ey 
attempt to think  with it, in ways that artic-
u late speciﬁ c onto lo gical, epistem o lo gical 
and 
ethical 
commit ments. 
 Material 
femin ism is think ing with matter. Matter 
here is lively; it destabil izes anthro po-
centric and human ist onto lo gical priv ilege. 
Understanding matter (includ ing non- 
human nature and the biolo gical substrata 
of human life) as some thing that ‘feels, 
converses, suﬀ ers, desires, yearns, and 
remem bers’ ( Barad 2012 : 60) as that which 
‘reads and writes, calcu lates and copu lates,’ 
( Kirby 2011 : 95) or as what attempts to 
‘ques tion, solve, control, calcu late, protect, 
and destroy’ ( Wilson 2004 : 82) suggests 
that matter is in fact  agen tial. While this 
claim is not uncon tro ver sial (as it may risk 
dilut ing femin ist concep tions of moral 
agents), it import antly reminds us that 
when matter moves us (or moves other 
matters) this is not a brute causal deter-
m in a tion. Agency here is quite basic ally 
about ‘chan ging the possib il it ies of change’ 
( Barad 2007 : 178).  All  matters take part 
(diﬀ er ently) in this agency- as-a- doing, 
natural bodies (of virtu al ity and of ﬂ esh). 
It evid ences the fact of them being tech-
no lo gical construc tions. 
  14. Here we refer to Agamben’s proposal for 
‘profan a tion’: ‘To profane means to open 
the possib il ity of a special form of negli-
gence, which ignores separ a tion or, rather, 
puts it to a partic u lar use’ ( Agamben 
2007 : 73).  
 15. ‘Th e ergo nomic design of inter act ive 
media has left  behind the algorithmic 
“stuﬀ ” of compu ta tion by burying 
inform a tion processing in the back-
ground of percep tion and embed ding it 
deep within objects’ ( Parisi 2013a ). 
 16. Breaking and pier cing the mesh are 
gestures that ‘Th is topo lo gical dynamic 
rever ber ates with  QFT processes . . . in a 
process of intra- active becom ing, of 
recon ﬁ g ur ing and trans- forming oneself 
in the self’s multiple and dispers ive sense 
of it- self where the self is intrins ic ally a 
nonself.’ ( Barad 2015 ). 
 17. ‘Experiments in virtu al ity – explor a tions 
of possible trans*form a tions – are integ ral 
to each and every (ongoing) be(coming)’ 
( Barad 2015 ).  
 Femke Snelting and Jara Rocha  
 MATERIAL FEMINISMS  
 What’s the matter with femin ism? Th e 
recent so- called ‘turn’ in femin ist theory 
toward  matter has been met with mixed 
reac tions. Aft er all, even if the post struc-
tur al ism that domin ated femin ist theory in 
the 1990s might have put the emphasis 
else where, femin ist interest in mater i al ity 
– in ﬂ eshy, mater ial bodies, in the mater ial 
eﬀ ects of imma ter ial processes, in ‘nature’ 
that too oft en served as a foil to ‘culture’ – 
has remained steady. A concern for 
mater i al ity – if that is all that this turn 
means – is hardly  new . Characterized as 
primar ily 
onto lo gical, 
and 
drawing
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MATERIAL FEMINISMS 
eﬀ ort ‘to respect and meet well with, even 
extend care to, others while acknow ledging 
that we may not know the other and what 
the best kind of care would be’ (ibid.: 8). 
Th e ethical commit ments of think ing with 
matter do not come from a ‘norm at ive 
moral ity’ ( Puig de la Bellacasa 2010 ); ethics 
here does not comprise inten tional ‘right 
actions’, moral univer sal isms, or an exten-
sion of human ethical programs (e.g. 
human rights) to the non- human world 
( Braidotti 2013 : 190). Because this ethics is 
insep ar able from the onto lo gies and 
epistem o lo gies that condi tion it, it must 
also reject human mastery. We may not 
know who or what the other we encounter 
is, or needs, but forever entangled in these 
rela tions, we must nego ti ate the ethics of 
these meet ings and their collab or at ive 
matter ings. As such, this ethics demands 
that we remain open, attent ive and curious 
towards the other, and what she asks of us. 
Barad calls this an ethics of respons iv ity: it 
is ‘about respons ib il ity and account ab il ity 
for the lively rela tion al it ies of becom ing of 
which we are a part’ ( Barad 2007 : 393). 
 Th is mater ial think ing expands a 
femin ist concep tion of ethics, but it also 
raises the diﬃ   cult ques tion of toward 
whom or what a femin ist ethics should be 
direc ted. Might we join thinkers such Val 
Plumwood, Rosi Braidotti and Claire 
Colebrook in under stand ing ‘a critique of 
masculin ism [as] inter twined with a 
concern for the nonhu man’ ( Colebrook 
2012 : 72)? If the deep struc tures of power 
and oppres sion are a femin ist issue, then 
these concerns do not stop at the human 
subject – or rather, they force a recog ni tion 
of that subject as also a mater ial one, 
embed ded in and as worldly mater i al ity. 
Such an expres sion of care and concern for 
the non- human is not a homo gen ized or 
‘ﬂ at’ ethics; within a femin ist carto graphy 
of power, diﬀ er ence still always matters 
( Braidotti 2013 ). A rela tion ship of  respe cere 
where possib il it ies for change emerge in 
ongoing intra- actions of matters that are 
never completed. Rather than a dilu tion of 
agency as applied to humans, agency in 
femin ist mater i al isms invites us to consider 
how non- human bodies or matters might 
contrib ute to their own actu al iz a tion. 
 Th is recu per a tion of matter’s live li ness 
does not mean that issues of language and 
repres ent a tion are over writ ten, or eﬀ aced. 
Th inking with matter also fore grounds 
 think ing.  Important insights into repres-
ent a tion and discurs ive construc tions are 
not eschewed, but rather them selves under-
stood as entangled in matter’s own express-
ive limits. Self- evident mater i al ity does not 
trump discurs iv ity, any more than onto-
logy would epistem o logy; consid erations 
of matter as agen tial in fact substan tially 
contrib ute to why femin ist mater i al isms 
are not only an onto lo gical but also an 
epistem o lo gical and ethical concern. Such 
epistem o lo gical stakes are high lighted, for 
example, when Barad reminds us that 
‘knowing is a matter of part of the world 
making itself intel li gible to another part’ 
( Barad 2007 : 185). Even if the matters we 
think with inspire us to think in new ways, 
we are never think ing alone. Or, put other-
wise: if we under stand non- human matter 
as agen tial, then we must also give up on 
epistem o lo gical mastery. Material femin-
isms thus draw on femin ist epistem o lo gical 
critiques of total know ledge, reson ant with 
what Donna Haraway has called ‘situ ated 
know ledges’ ( Haraway 1988 ) and Rosi 
Braidotti has called an epistem o lo gical 
posi tion of ‘embed ded ness and embod ied-
ness’ ( Braidotti 2005 ). 
 Still, in the context of these onto- 
epistem o lo gies a ques tion remains: ‘was 
this turn (whatever we want to call it) an 
ethical turn?’ ( Åsberg 2013 : 7). Cecilia 
Åsberg provides an excel lent synop sis of 
the ethics at stake in the new femin ist turn 
to mater i al ity, where this emerges in an
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
poten tial futures; it collects not only 
femin ist thinkers from diverse types of 
inquiry, but also acts trans vers ally, unfold-
ing both back wards and forwards, and 
gath er ing thinkers from diﬀ er ent (non- 
linear) times. It might be that we are only 
recently paying atten tion to mater ial 
femin isms  as such . In other words:  femin-
ism has never been imma ter ial . 
 See also Neo/New Materialism; Post-
human Critical Th eory; Postdisciplinarity; 
Feminist Posthumanities. 
 Astrida Neimanis 
 MATTERING  
 Karen Barad begins  Meeting the Universe 
Halfway: Quantum Physics and the 
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning with 
a seem ingly straight for ward deﬁ n i tion of 
matter ing. It refers to the idea that ‘Matter 
and meaning are not separ ate elements . . . 
Mattering is simul tan eously a matter of 
substance and signi ﬁ c ance’ ( Barad 2007 : 
3). Th e mater ial world and its meaning are 
co- consti tuted 
through 
the 
iter at ive 
process of matter ing. But this notion of 
matter ing has a complic ated theor et ical 
history. Its gene a logy can be traced 
from Barad’s trans dis cip lin ary formu la tion 
of the term at the inter sec tion of 
physics, science studies, mater ial femin-
isms ( Alaimo and Hekman 2008 ), new 
mater ial ism ( Coole and Frost 2010 ) and 
posthu man ism to its earlier devel op ment 
in post struc tur al ist and femin ist theory. 
While I want to make the case that ‘matter-
ing’ is the most robust frame work the 
(post)human it ies have for theor iz ing the 
 dynam ics of nature cul tures ( Haraway 
2003 ) – which is to say the way in which 
change occurs across entangled mater ial 
and discurs ive phenom ena – I also want to 
toward the non- human does not erase 
diﬀ er ences between humans and non- 
humans, or among diﬀ er ently situ ated 
humans. In fact, an ethics of respons iv ity, 
never know able in advance, poin tedly 
 under lines such diﬀ er ences: how am I 
respons ible to  this  body,  this time, in  this 
encounter? Material femin isms are not a 
nega tion or erasure of a femin ist gene a logy 
of ethical think ing, but its very embrace 
and further devel op ment. 
 Yet to fulﬁ l this ethical promise, femin ist 
mater i al isms must resist instru ment al iz a-
tion at all levels; we must remain vigil ant in 
our refusal to reduce these matters to their 
use- value for the thinker. Here, this includes 
a refusal to treat these matters as mere 
fodder for our intel lec tual products, or to 
simply recruit matter as meta phor, concept 
or conceit. Even (or  espe cially ) as we call on 
non- human matter to ignite our theor et-
ical, creat ive ﬁ res as our collab or at ors, ‘we 
must ﬁ nd another rela tion ship to nature’ – 
or non- human matter more broadly 
construed – ‘besides reiﬁ c a tion, posses sion, 
appro pri ation, and nostal gia’ ( Haraway 
2008 : 126). We must insist that matter, in all 
of its non- human and more- than-human 
guises, is not only a ‘co- labourer’, doing all 
the grunt work for little or nothing in 
return ( Neimanis 2012 ). Th e ethics at stake 
here are thus not just ‘in general’, to be 
learned from these matters, but an ethics to 
be  direc ted speciﬁ c ally toward these matters 
we ‘think with’. ‘Th inking with’ in a femin ist 
context must remain commit ted to holding 
on to this ‘with’, even once the heavy think-
ing is done. Th ese matters give us insights, 
theor ies (public a tions, jobs, live li hoods), 
but what are we giving back? How are we 
honour ing these matters and their gift s? 
An acknow ledge ment of the ethics implic-
ated in a femin ist mater ial turn is also a 
provoca tion. 
 Th is ‘think ing with matter’ isn’t new as 
such. It gathers both possible pasts and
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MATTERING 
entit ies, how can we claim to observe that 
system’s evol u tion in isol a tion? Th is insight 
suggests that we completely rethink 
dynam ics. With matter ing, ‘the very nature 
of change and the possib il it ies for change 
changes in an ongoing fashion as part of 
the world’s . . . dynam ism’ ( Barad 2007 : 
179). A perform at ive under stand ing of 
matter, in other words, alters the very 
nature of change and caus al ity. 
 Causality, the core prin ciple of clas sical 
dynam ics, suggests that change occurs 
when one discrete entity (cause) inﬂ u ences 
another (eﬀ ect), where both the caus at ive 
and eﬀ ect ive agents pre- exist their rela tion. 
However, once we replace caus al ity with 
perform ativ ity as our central dynamic 
prin ciple, the concept of change changes. 
Change is no longer a ques tion of what 
causes what, but of what coex ists with what. 
Th e rules of Bohr’s ( 1958 ) comple ment ar ity 
and inde term in acy rela tions – the quantum 
theor et ical preced ents for Barad’s dynam ics 
of matter ing – are such that they provide 
inform a tion not about what causes produce 
what eﬀ ects, but about what observ able 
values and corres pond ing states of exist-
ence can come into being simul tan eously. 
As I have noted else where, ‘Th eoretically . . . 
inde term in acy rela tions should thus tell us 
how mind and matter can or cannot coexist 
within diﬀ er ent events, given a suﬃ   ciently 
detailed account of the appar atus/exper i-
mental arrange ments in ques tion’ ( Jones 
2014 : 193). Th e dynam ics of matter ing 
tell us what mean ings and states of matter 
can simul tan eously co- exist and which 
cannot within speciﬁ ed mater ial- discurs ive 
contexts. 
 Th e combin a tion of the cultural studies 
vocab u lary of perform ativ ity with the 
vocab u lary of quantum physics in this 
account of matter ing should provide a 
rough sense of the term’s complex 
disciplin ary history. We certainly cannot 
mention perform ativ ity without evoking 
high light how the term’s rhizo matic ances-
try is a test a ment to the non- separ ab il ity of 
dynam ics and ethics. 
 Mattering is a kind of posthu man ist 
perform ativ ity that emphas izes matter’s 
capa city to matter, to achieve signi ﬁ c ance 
in its being  as doing. Matter here is not 
ground or essence, but agen t ive, ‘produced 
and product ive, gener ated and gener at ive’ 
( Barad 2007 : 137). To attend to matter in 
this way is posthu man ist because agency, 
histor icity and inten tion al ity – the keys to 
meaning- making – are under stood not as 
attrib utes of human culture and subjectiv-
ity, but as transcor por eal enact ments that 
extend across and through human and 
nonhu man bodies ( Alaimo 2010 ). And it is 
perform at ive because it suggests that 
discrete entit ies and the mean ings attached 
to them emerge within, rather than 
precede, the rela tions that consti tute them. 
When we pose the ques tion of what 
matters and how, we are not dealing with 
pre- exist ing bodies upon which language 
inscribes meaning, but with rela tions of 
doing, acting and becom ing that exist in 
mater ial- discurs ive super pos i tion until an 
agen tial cut inter venes to demarc ate clear 
bound ar ies between words and things. 
And this agen tial cut, or bound ary- making 
prac tice, is a part of the very phenomenon 
it speciﬁ es, rather than apart from it. 
 Performativity is thus the dynamic core 
of matter ing. ‘To specify or study the 
dynam ics of a system’, Barad tells us, ‘is to 
say some thing about the nature of and 
possib il it ies for change’ (2007: 179). 
Normally, in the natural sciences, study ing 
dynam ics means observing how the vari-
ables that describe the state of a system 
change over time. But this under stand ing 
of the nature of change is rendered incom-
pre hens ible under the rubric of matter ing’s 
perform at ive dynam ics. Indeed, if the 
prop er ties of a system are not determ in ate 
outside of the system’s rela tion with other
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
invites nonhu mans as well as humans, but 
what, if anything, does this proposal do to 
address the kinds of  concerns that femin-
ist, queer, post co lo nial, (post-)-Marxist, 
and crit ical race theor ists and activ ists 
have brought to the table? 
 2007: 58, emphasis added 
 Th e inclu sion or exclu sion of accounts of 
the mater i al iz a tion of matter, meaning or 
iden tity, in other words, is not an end in 
itself, but  comes to matter through the artic-
u la tion of those accounts within speciﬁ c 
contexts and histor ies . Th at is, includ ing 
versus exclud ing is a diﬀ er ence that makes 
a diﬀ er ence to certain polit ical concerns 
and prior it ies and not others based on how 
those concerns have been addressed within 
the ﬁ eld(s) in ques tion. We cannot include 
or exclude ‘certain issues without taking 
respons ib il ity and being account able for 
the constitutive eﬀ ects’ ( Barad 2007 : 58) 
those inclu sions or exclu sions have within 
certain discip lin ary histor ies. 
 Such is the ethics of matter ing that 
comple ments and is non- separ able from 
its dynam ics. For, accord ing to matter ing’s 
account of how some bodies and mean ings 
become asso ci ated and not others, when 
we decide to draw on certain theor ists and 
tradi tions and not others, we are parti cip-
at ing in a bound ary- making prac tice that 
matters for the ﬁ eld in which we are 
making an inter ven tion. We are a part of a 
mater ial- discurs ive process of chan ging 
the possib il it ies for change. As such, we 
cannot feign to be exempt from the 
‘respons ib il ity and account ab il ity for the 
lively rela tion al it ies of becom ing of which 
we are a part’ ( Barad 2007 : 393). By focus-
ing on the dynam ics of perform ativ ity in 
this entry, I am part of an agen tial cut 
within posthu man ism that places Barad 
and Butler at the centre of the conver sa tion 
about the termin o logy of matter ing. 
 With this theor et ical cut, I mean to 
address, share and promote the broader 
Judith Butler’s pion eer ing formu la tion of 
the term in gender studies, femin ist theory 
and queer theory. Indeed, Barad makes 
clear that her twin concepts of posthu-
man ist perform ativ ity and matter ing are 
further devel op ments of Butler’s concepts 
of gender perform ativ ity and mater i al iz a-
tion as she artic u lates them in  Gender 
Trouble (1990) and  Bodies Th at Matter 
(1993). Barad extends to matter Butler’s 
recon cep tu al iz a tion of gender as a doing 
rather than an attrib ute. She thereby devel-
ops a paral lel ism between the processes of 
 gender ing and  matter ing . If ‘gender is a 
doing, not in the sense that there is a 
pregendered person who performs its 
gender, but rather with the under stand ing 
that  gender ing . . . is a temporal process that 
oper ates through the iter a tion of norms’ 
( Barad 2007 : 57), then matter ing accounts 
for the role of matter, as an active agent, in 
such processes of the mater i al iz a tion of 
gender and other iden tit ies. Mattering is a 
part of the process of gender ing, amongst 
other perform at ive prac tices. Th e concept 
of matter ing thereby expands the dynam-
ics of perform ativ ity to include nonhu man 
bodies and prac tices as well as human ones 
– a step Barad laments Butler neglect ing. 
 But neither Barad’s exten sion of 
perform ativ ity to matter nor my gesture to 
the indebted ness of the concept of matter-
ing to Butler is ulti mately about inclu sion. 
It is about respons ib il ity, about ethics, an 
ethics inscribed in the very dynam ics of 
matter ing. As Barad writes about her 
insist ence on bring ing the insights of 
perform at ive cultural analysis to bear on 
science studies, 
 Th e issue is not simply a matter of inclu-
sion. Th e main point has to do with power. 
How is power under stood? How are the 
social and the polit ical theor ized? Some 
science studies research ers are endors ing 
Bruno Latour’s proposal for a new parlia-
ment ary govern mental struc ture that
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MAXWELL’S DEMON (NON-ANTHROPOCENTRIC COGNITION) 
force nor in (meta phys ical) substan tial 
terms (see  Negentropy ). Before discuss ing 
how the stakes were formu lated in this 
thought exper i ment, and how these same 
stakes were re- artic u lated in famous 
discus sions of it, it is import ant to under-
stand that here, we have the begin ning of a 
certain coinage of think ing about chance 
in purely oper a tional terms: one which 
attrib utes prob ab il ity to humanly imper-
fect faculties that need not, in prin ciple, be 
taken into account if oper a tions in the 
natural sciences be carried out by a ‘pure’ 
agency like the partic u lar intel li gence 
which Maxwell set out to design in his 
thought exper i ment. Th is very back ground 
links the concept discussed in this brief 
article to the discus sions about arti ﬁ  cial 
intel li gence at large, also beyond the selec-
ted aspects that will be discussed here. 1 
 James Clark Maxwell respon ded to the 
problem of ther mo dy nam ics’ irre vers ib il-
ity with a thought exper i ment designed to 
resolve the subjectiv ity which appar ently 
inheres to exper i mental science when it 
involves heat balances (through prob ab il-
ity). If heat is appar ently not to be held 
identical 
with 
energy 
(irre vers ib il ity, 
second law) nor approached in meta phys-
ical terms as a new kind of substance, then 
we can think of heat as the motion of 
molecules in popu la tions, Maxwell main-
tained. Individually – so he formu lated the 
belief of many of his contem por ar ies – the 
molecules must obey Newton’s Laws: 
Every action, every colli sion, must be 
meas ur able and calcul able in theory. Th is 
assump tion led him to invent a scen ario 
that involves a perfect observer, one whose 
faculties were not to be ﬂ awed like the 
human imper fect ones, in short, a cognit-
ive agency freed from all subjectiv ity and 
prob ab il ity, and hence whose reas on ing 
would be freed from irre vers ib il ity. 
Maxwell set up the ideally perfect exper i-
ment where the observer is to be capable of 
concerns of posthu man femin ist theory. 
Proto- posthu man ist and posthu man ist 
femin ists – such as Butler, Haraway, Barad, 
Alaimo and Braidotti ( 2013 ) – have 
developed the concept of matter ing in 
order to under stand mater ial bodies as 
sites of polit ical struggle. Th ese theor ists 
deploy the term to account for the agency 
of human and non- human bodies in the 
iter at ive (re)conﬁ g ur ing of gender norms 
and sexual power diﬀ er en tials. According 
to this gene a logy, the dynam ics of matter-
ing are never not polit ical. Th us, even when 
theor iz a tions of matter ing ‘do not speak 
directly to the ques tions of sex or gender, 
they still have their roots in femin ism as 
a social move ment, via their insist ence 
that the human body is, simul tan eously, a 
polit ical, onto lo gical, and epistem o lo gical 
site’ ( Alaimo 2014 : 16). An ethical invest i-
g a tion into the dynam ics of matter ing, then, 
means not just includ ing the theor ists 
that developed the concept, but also 
respons ibly support ing their femin ist, 
posthu man ist polit ics. 
 See also Commutation Ontology; Locality/
Non-Separability; Neo/New Materialism; 
Material 
Feminisms; 
Naturecultures; 
Posthumanist 
Performativity; 
Trans- 
corpor eal ity; Quantum Anthropology. 
 Brandon Jones 
 MAXWELL’S DEMON (NON-
ANTHROPOCENTRIC COGNITION)  
 In this entry, I would like to discuss one of 
the key moments of refer ence in twen ti eth- 
century inform a tion science, which arose 
from ther mo dy nam ics and which in fact 
links the latter to the former in many 
import ant aspects. Maxwell’s famous 
thought exper i ment explores how to think 
of heat, if we can conceive of it neither as a
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
MAXWELL’S DEMON (NON-ANTHROPOCENTRIC COGNITION)
 But there were prob lems with faculties 
perfec ted in Szilárd’s manner as well: 
once we assume that a system needs to be 
quant ized in order to be meas ured and 
hence remembered, we are dealing with the 
unknown quant it ies of micro scopic vari-
ables that ‘make it possible for the system 
to take a large variety of quant ized struc-
tures’: stochastic deﬁ n i tions (Laplacean 
determ in ism) apply only to lower frequen-
cies like those of a ther mo stat (in essence 
the kind of intel li gence Maxwell conceived 
of), but not to higher frequen cies like those 
of an oscil lator (the re- devolp ment of 
Maxwell’s intel li gence by Szilárd); higher 
frequen cies display no stochastic distri bu-
tions; the posi tion and magnitude of the 
waves cannot be at once observed and 
hence such obser va tion involves prob ab il-
it ies. Even if the perfect agent would apply 
his perfect faculties by meas ur ing (object-
ively), its assump tion would not lend itself 
to stig mat ize prob ab il it ies to the side of 
subjectiv ity against a supposedly stochastic 
distri bu tion of object ive nature. 
 Probability enters the picture of 
Laplacean determ in ism in that the move-
ment of molecules has to be meas ured and 
calcu lated  in popu la tions (rather than indi-
vidu ally) . Th is implies a fore ground ing of a 
certain role of code in this meas ur ing and 
calcu lat ing. 6 Th e methods of prob ab il ist ics 
diﬀ er from those of stochastics with regard 
to this role of encryp tion. From this 
perspect ive, entropy is a term to measure 
the dissip a tion of heat by means of encrypt-
ing ‘a large amount’– large enough to count 
the total ity of possible trans form a tion in 
an ideal state in which every next step is 
equally likely (entropy). Th e core assump-
tion of ther mo dy nam ics is that the total 
amount of energy in the universe is invari-
ant, that nothing can be added or subtrac-
ted to it (First Law of Th ermodynamics). 
Entropy is the name for that number, and 
its exten sion (large ness of this number) is 
puri fy ing the science of heat from the 
factual irre vers ib il ity at work in it (see 
 Negentropy ). For this observer, ther mo-
 dy nam ics would be as determ ined and 
without need for the assump tion of a ﬁ nal 
cause or any other agency that acts in non- 
reas on able manner from a distance, as 
Newtonian physics. 2 
 When Leó Szilárd atten ded to Maxwell’s 
thought exper i ment, he hoped to dissip ate 
the rather meta phys ical discus sions that 
had emerged and gave rise to both animist 
as well as vital ist discus sions of the possi-
b il ity of a ‘perpetual move ment’ which 
Maxwell’s agency – if considered a legit i-
m ate concepts – would render real. 3 Instead 
he re- considered Maxwell’s purely mech-
an ical agency at stake in compu ta tional 
terms and equipped it with the capa city to 
memor ize and eval u ate all the obser va tions 
it makes, and hence be capable of making 
up for the inev it able expendit ure of energy 
through under stand ing how it could be 
balanced again. 4 Th e core assump tion of 
Szilárd 5 was that even this perfect observer’s 
faculties of obser va tion would have to be 
accoun ted for in terms of meas ure ment 
and calcu la tion or else – if obser va tion is 
not form al ized – the thought exper i ment’s 
value for justi fy ing a clas sical notion of 
exper i mental science is nulli ﬁ ed at once 
(since by deﬁ n i tion such obser va tion 
would tran scend the condi tions of exper i-
ment a tion). In order to account for the 
demon’s obser va tion in those terms, Szilárd 
intro duced ‘inform a tion’ and ‘memory’ into 
the set- up (although he did not speak of 
‘inform a tion’ prop erly, but spoke of the 
results of meas ure ments which needed to 
be memor ized in whatever ‘form’) ( Gleick 
2011 ). Szilárd eﬀ ect ively trans formed 
Maxwell’s original concep tion of a demon, 
acting mech an ic ally like a ther mo stat, into 
a  deus ex machina , an arti ﬁ  cially intel li gent 
being that can remem ber whatever exper i-
ences it makes while meas ur ing.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MAXWELL’S DEMON (NON-ANTHROPOCENTRIC COGNITION) 
 Th e implic a tions of such an economy, 
one that trans forms inform a tion into 
energy and vice versa, has only rarely been 
explored so far. It is mainly pursued in the 
work of Michel Serres, which I want to 
point to in conclu sion to this entry. Th us 
we want to ask with Michel Serres: ‘What 
does this demand for an abso lutely exact 
meas ure ment mean?’ He resumes: 
 In a famous theorem, Brillouin proved 
that a perfect exper i ment can abso lutely 
not be real ized, because it would produce 
an inﬁ n itely large amount of inform a tion 
and, in addi tion to this, an inﬁ n itely large 
amount of negen tropy would have to be 
expen ded . . . the clas sical phys i cist 
believed that he could go to the very 
limits, and observe what would happen if 
all mistakes in obser va tion could be 
reduced to zero; today we know that this 
margin is impossible, because the costs 
for this obser va tion would rise to inﬁ n ity. 
Absolute determ in ism is a dream, for 
perfect preci sion with regard to the initial 
condi tions cannot be achieved. In other 
words, this demand [for the perfect 
exper i ment,  VB ] exceeds the limits of a 
possible exper i ment, it tran scends its own 
postu lates. It is possible to prove that one 
can never know exactly all the para met ers 
of an exper i ment. Th ere remains a rest of 
chance, a remainder of the unknown. 8 
 Th e consequences Michel Serres draws 
from the failure are as original as they are 
daring: chance is to be regarded as the 
object of science, he main tains, not nature! 
Michel Serres sees in inform a tion theory 
a philo sophy of physics that is inher ent 
to the domain of physics. It is remark able, 
he points out, that Brillouin titled his book 
 La science et la théorie de l’information. 
Th is book contains, accord ing to Serres, 
an epistem o logy of the concept and the 
praxis of exper i ment a tion, formu lated 
in the language of physics, exhaust ively 
descript ive, quan ti ﬁ ed, normal ized and 
subjec ted to encryp tion in algeb raic code 
(see  Equation ). To think of energy like this, 
in terms of entropy, does not depend upon 
a semantic or substan tial inter pret a tion of 
energy, and it does not need to know just 
how much energy there really is in the 
universe (see  Invariance ). Every system 
that real (empir ical) science can identify is 
 one that factors in in this only cryp to graph-
ic ally know able invari ant amount total of 
energy in the universe. 
 Léon Brillouin, build ing upon the work 
of Szilárd, went a step further. Familiar with 
Turing’s (1936, 1952), Shannon’s ( 1948 ) and 
Wiener’s ( 1948 ) work on a math em at ical 
notion of inform a tion and their dispute 
with regard to whether inform a tion can be 
meas ured in terms of the exper i mental 
entropy notion applied to phys ical systems 
(Shannon), or whether it needs to be 
accoun ted for in Schrödinger’s terms of 
negen tropy import in biolo gical systems, 7 
Brillouin fore groun ded the role of ‘code’ in 
such ‘intel li gent’ compu ta tion and applied a 
 double notion of negen tropy and entropy – 
one to energy, one to inform a tion, under 
the assump tion that both are linked by 
code: free (entropic) inform a tion to him is 
the maximum amount of  a priori cases 
formu lated in a code. Th e  a priori  cases can 
be computed by combin at or ics, and each of 
them must be regarded as equally likely to 
happen in entropic inform a tion. Bound 
(negen tropic) inform a tion is empir ic ally 
meas ured inform a tion (in exper i ments 
with any partic u lar mani fest a tion of such a 
code). Th is tran scend ental in the meas ure-
ment of inform a tion allows for think ing of 
inform a tion as a kind of currency that 
through circu lat ing is capable of trans-
form ing energy into inform a tion and vice 
versa. Th is is how Brillouin could aﬃ  rm the 
ulti mate failure of Maxwell’s thought exper i-
ment: not even an obser va tion can be 
obtained gratu itiously, he main tained, and 
all inform a tion has its price.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
MAXWELL’S DEMON (NON-ANTHROPOCENTRIC COGNITION)
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MEDIANATURES 
either but embed ded in the cultural under-
stand ing of life. Th is is not to say that 
nature – to use the short hand to refer to 
the biosphere, hydro sphere, geosphere and 
also atmo sphere – is merely a repres ent a-
tion or deﬁ ned by cultural mean ings. It is 
just to point out that the nature and 
animals have been under stood and oper a-
tion al ized as a resource (as Martin 
Heidegger and others argued, includ ing 
 Braidotti 2006a : 98) and by way of tech-
nos cientiﬁ c frame works that deﬁ ne it 
through its chem istry and other sorts of 
analyt ics. Th is does not exhaust the intens-
ity of nature as a living form a tion ( Braidotti 
2006a ;  Parikka 2014 ) but it does for sure 
force us to consider it as part of a feed back 
loop that involves much more than just 
nature. Hence to talk of medi anatures, a 
term that is a useful neolo gism, is a way to 
try to grasp the intens ive co- determ in a tion 
and co- emer gence of the two spheres of 
natural dynam ics and media cultural 
epistem o lo gies, of the onto- epistem o lo gical 
situ ation that deﬁ nes our tech nical 
modern ity. Media are in and of nature in 
ways that expand any talk of the envir on-
ment into a virtual ecology of ‘social, polit-
ical, ethical and aesthetic dimen sions’ 
( Braidotti 2006a : 123; see also  Guattari 
2000  and  Fuller 2005 ). 
 Medianatures is a concept that owes its 
exist ence to Donna Haraway’s notion of 
nature cul tures. Naturecultures is a key 
term that features in many of Haraway’s 
examples and discus sions of compan ion 
species. It is a concept that troubles separ a-
tions of nature from culture, and in general 
addresses the prob lem atic categor ies by 
way of the microint er ac tions that deﬁ ne 
for example animal–human rela tions. 
Hence, 
when 
address ing 
compan ion 
species, Haraway speaks of the shared co- 
becom ings in which the two are mutu ally 
implied: they are symbi otic and emer gent. 
Such situ ated case studies are not merely 
ideal ity – an ideal ity which is to serve as a 
support to the exper i mental paradigm of 
science, with the least possible semantical 
(biased) import. 
 7. Shannon discusses the term negat ive 
entropy, but considers its distinc tion negli-
gible for inform a tion as a math em at ical 
quant ity notion. It was Norbert Wiener, 
who, via the work by John von Neumann, 
Alan Turing, Claude Shannon and Leo 
Szilard, main tained against Shannon that 
negen tropy is in fact crucial, rather than 
negli gible for a math em at ical theory of 
inform a tion; it is largely due to this dispute 
that until today, diﬀ er ent notions of 
math em at ical inform a tion are in usage: 
(1) inform a tion as a measure for order 
in terms of entropy, and (2) inform a tion 
as a measure for order as negen tropy; 
while both speak of inform a tion as a 
measure, and hence capable of estab lish-
ing order, the two concepts of order are 
actu ally inverse to each other: order as 
negen tropy means minimal entropy 
(maximal amount of bound energy, 
minimal of free or avail able energy in 
Schrödinger’s terms), while order as 
entropy means minimal negen tropy 
(maximal amount of free and avail able 
energy, minimal amount of bound energy 
in Schrödinger’s terms). Much confu sion 
in the under stand ing of ‘inform a tion’ 
arises from this still today.  
 8. ‘Leben, Information, und der zweite 
Hauptsatz 
der 
Th ermodynamik’, 
in 
 Hermes III Übersetzung (Berlin: Merve, 
1992), 53–96, Here in my own English 
trans la tion, pp. 90–1. 
 9. Ibid. 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 MEDIANATURES  
 Media is hardly just about media. 
Furthermore, nature is not merely nature
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Whitehead, Deleuze and Guattari, femin ist 
theory and for example Strathern – could 
be seen related to Gilbert Simondon’s 
notion of indi vidu ation. Furthermore, 
through radical anthro po logy, one can 
summon a wide range of altern at ive meta-
phys ics to under stand the contem por ary 
condi tion of muta tion of under stand ing 
of culture and tech no logy but also the 
multinat ur al ism (see  Castro 2015 ). 
 Besides its own concep tual power, 
nature cul tures allows us to think of medi-
anatures, a concept which builds on the 
new mater i al ist emphasis on the connec-
ted ness of mater ial- semi otic (Haraway) 
and discurs ive- mater ial (Barad) by way of 
a speciﬁ c media cultural and tech no lo gical 
focus. Similarly, as  medi ation happens 
across a whole spec trum of mater ial real it-
ies ( Grusin 2015 ;  Cubitt 2014a ;  Parikka 
2015 ) irre du cible to the media devices, 
 media itself can be seen to consist of an 
assembly of elements of nature ( Peters 
2015 ). 
 Instead of think ing that there is a 
histor ical discon nec tion between media 
culture and the natural form a tions that 
histor ic ally precede the modern tech nical 
media, medi anatures works to illus trate 
the speciﬁ c and situ ated mater ial inter ac-
tions that under pin media tech no lo gical 
prac tices. Media tech no logy itself is mater-
ial; it is composed of a variety of geolo gical 
mater ial and geophys ical forces. It needs 
metals and miner als to summon its worlds 
of audi ovisu al ity, colour, speed, processing 
power and storage. Such processes of tech-
nical quality are made of seem ingly odd 
elements such as lithium, coltan and rare 
earth miner als, while not forget ting the 
massive energy consump tion of the 
devices and the networked cloud services. 
Th is assembly that we call media tech no-
logy is reliant on massive global networks 
of energy and supply chains that them-
selves are linked to a geography of media 
for the purposes of onto lo gical medit a tion 
but they are ways to address ‘livable polit-
ics and onto lo gies in current life worlds’ 
( Haraway 2003 : 4). Th ey teach that onto lo-
gies not merely ‘are’ but they emerge; they 
are active real it ies, which resist stable typo-
lo gies of being. Haraway draws on A.N. 
Whitehead’s process philo sophy and the 
active verb form: the world is formed 
through prehen sions (ibid.: 6), an insight 
that forms Haraway’s under stand ing of the 
world as knotted. Th is is where it becomes 
clear that the concept is driven by situ ated 
prac tices that take into account femin ist 
know ledge, which refuses handed- down 
categor ies. It also draws from the reality 
of post co lo nial situ ations that inform 
Haraway’s examples. Indeed, it is also the 
anthro po lo gist Marilyn Strathern’s work 
that becomes an import ant refer ence point 
in think ing outside the dysfunc tional 
dualism of nature or culture. Instead, 
Strathern’s ﬁ eld work in Papua New Guinea 
contrib utes to Haraway’s concept in terms 
of oﬀ er ing the idea of partial connec tions 
that are not determ ined by ‘wholes nor 
parts’ (ibid.: 8). It is instead a rela tional 
nexus that one could also under stand 
through Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s 
(1987) emphasis on molecu lar real it ies 
that work under and across the visible, 
formed molar iden tit ies. 
 Naturecultures is a way of address ing 
the world of intra- actions and co- 
becomings in which the signi ﬁ c ant others 
– dogs, bacteria and a multi pli city of non- 
humans – are accom pa ny ing the so- called 
human. Th is sort of agenda contrib utes to 
the possib il ity of think ing outside the indi-
vidual ( Haraway 2008 : 32–3) and other 
similar concepts that misplace concrete-
ness (in Whitehead’s sense) on the stabil ity 
of the form (such as Nature). Th ere would 
be a lot to be unfol ded as to the philo soph-
ical gene a logy of this sort of an account 
that – in addi tion to the already- mentioned
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
METADATA SOCIETY 
always about place and place ment, of use 
and useless ness, of the work of mater ial 
sciences and the ancient, prehis toric Earth 
mater i als such as fossil fuels ﬁ ring up our 
computers. It is a philo soph ical concept 
but sustains the energy of Haraway’s 
nature cul tures in that also medi anatures 
are to contrib ute to live able polit ics and 
polit ics of global life of media products in 
their prehis tory and their aft er life – as well 
as the various people exposed to media 
before, and aft er, they become media for 
the consumer sphere. 
 See also Digital Rubbish; Earth; Four 
Elements; Naturecultures; Neocolonial; 
Neo/New Materialism. 
 Jussi Parikka 
 METADATA SOCIETY  
 Metadata Society is the name given to the 
tech no pol it ical form that emerges along-
side and within the network society 
( Castells 1996 ) due to the growth of corpor-
ate and state data centres since the late 
1990s. Datacentres accu mu late ‘big data’ – 
vast bodies of inform a tion about the world’s 
climate, stock markets, commod ity supply 
chains and the phone commu nic a tions and 
social networks of billions of people for 
example. Th e estab lish ment of these large 
data sets as primary source of cognit ive 
capital and polit ical power marks the birth 
of the metadata society, being precisely the 
 meta analysis of data – mapping and inter-
pret ing their patterns and trends, and fore-
cast ing their tend en cies – and not their 
brute accu mu la tion that makes data sets 
mean ing ful and valu able. If the network 
society was a ‘space of ﬂ ows’ ( Castells 1996 ) 
that was based on the hori zontal exchange 
of elec tronic inform a tion, data centres 
incarn ate the vertical accu mu la tion of 
mater i als from African, Chinese and South 
American miner als, to various pipelines 
and power plants that provide energy (see 
for example  Hogan 2015 ), to the labour 
condi tions and prac tices that make these 
mater i als move (see  Wark 2015a on the 
meta bolic rift ). It is a massive ecolo gical 
oper a tion that sustains the fact that we 
have a commu nic a tion sphere of digital 
inform a tion that seems imma ter ial when it 
comes to the speed of retrieval of a web 
page, the reli ab il ity of the cloud- stored 
image and the instant an eous feeling of the 
intim ate chat services that run, in most 
cases, through corpor ate servers. To talk of 
medi anatures illus trates this double bind: 
on the one hand, media oﬀ ers our epistem-
o logy, and is instru ment al ized in the 
intens ive mapping of the planet for its 
resources, mater i als and energy. And it is 
these resources, excav ated oft en in places 
inhab ited by indi gen ous people or in 
envir on ment ally vulner able areas like the 
Arctic, that place special emphasis on 
local ity (see  Cubitt 2014b ). Th e epistem o-
lo gic ally misplaced dualism of media and 
nature gives way to the intens ive ties and 
indi vidu ations that bring about media 
culture as a form a tion that consists of 
ecolo gies of mater i al ity as well as labour. In 
addi tion to the construc tion of tech no lo-
gies, issues also reach out to the discarded 
tech no logy that is an e- waste hazard and 
becomes another disposed zombie media 
( Hertz and Parikka 2012 ) object in rural 
loca tions outside the main centres of 
consump tion. Th ey end up in regions such 
as west Africa (Nigeria and Ghana), China 
(Guiyu), Pakistan and India where the 
opening up of dead media tech no lo gies for 
their scrap metals is seem ingly worth the 
time despite the massive health risks 
involved. 
 Hence, medi anatures is a concept that 
speaks to the mater i al ity of media tech no-
lo gies. But it does it in ways that are also
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
not appar ent in Manovich 1999’s essay 
‘Database as Symbolic Form’). Th e polit ical 
space of data emerges as an exten sion of 
previ ous insti tu tions of know ledge and 
power, although now under the complex 
and heavy rule of inform a tion sciences 
and math em at ics. ‘Datascapes’ were born 
in the registers of the ancient archives as 
simple squared grids: hori zontal lines with 
the person’s name and vertical lines carving 
out and order ing polit ical data: age, gender, 
class, disease, crime, etc. Th e register’s grids 
expan ded their territ or ies with the bureau-
cracy of the modern state ( Desrosières 
2002 ). Th e  US census in 1890, for instance, 
was possible thanks to the intro duc tion of 
punched cards by the Tabulating Machine 
Company (that in 1924 would change its 
name to International Business Machines, 
or  IBM ). Th e 1890 census already made 
clear how inform a tion tech no lo gies were 
contrib ut ing to processes of segment a tion 
and racial iz a tion of  US society. Aft er the 
Second World War the encounter of stat-
ist ics with the ﬁ rst main frame computers 
gener ated the data base as polit ical form. 
 Th e data base depicts  math em at ic ally 
the form a tions of power that Foucault was 
used to record ing  insti tu tion ally . Today the 
category of ‘asocial beha viour’, for instance, 
is computed by an algorithm in real time: 
there is no longer the need for a stable 
taxonomy codi ﬁ ed by the discip lines of 
psycho logy or crim in o logy. If a Foucault of 
the twen ti eth century could speak the same 
language of the insti tu tional archive, a 
Foucault of the twenty- ﬁ rst century would 
require consid er able tech nical train ing to 
access the digital one. According to such an 
epistemic divide, Manovich rightly iden ti-
ﬁ es three ‘data classes’: 
 Th e explo sion of data and the emer gence 
of compu ta tional data analysis as the 
key scientiﬁ c and economic approach in 
contem por ary soci et ies create new kinds 
of divi sions. Speciﬁ cally, people and 
inform a tion about inform a tion, that is 
 metadata . ‘Metadata repres ent the shift  to a 
diﬀ er ent and higher dimen sional scale in 
rela tion to inform a tion: they disclose the 
collect ive and polit ical nature that is 
intrinsic to all inform a tion’ ( Pasquinelli 
2015b ). Metadata describe also the abstract 
coordin ates of a new posthu man condi tion 
that is the matrix of  dividu als that compose 
the  super ject in the society of control 
( Deleuze 1992b ).  
 History 
 Th e topo lo gical origin of the data centre 
hege mony can be iden ti ﬁ ed in speciﬁ c 
bifurc a tions of the network society, in 
which partic u lar nodes started to record, 
map or wiretap all the inform a tion 
exchanged through the network. As soon 
as the World Wide Web became a popular 
medium across the 1990s, the problem of 
its carto graphy was given. Th e cleverest 
solu tion to the navig a tion of the  WWW 
came from Google’s PageRank algorithm. 
Th e ﬁ rst data centre set up by Google 
in 1998 (known as ‘Th e Cage’) can be 
considered the mile stone of the birth of the 
metadata society, as it was the ﬁ rst data-
centre to start mapping the inter net on a 
global scale via vectors of ranking. In 2013 
Edward Snowden revealed  NSA ’s massive 
clandes tine 
surveil lance 
programme 
 PRISM to the news pa per  Th e Guardian 
( Greenwald and MacAskill 2013 ), initi at-
ing a big debate on metadata surveil lance 
(Cole 2014). Th us the period between 1998 
and 2013 can be roughly iden ti ﬁ ed as the 
consol id a tion of the tech no pol it ical form 
of the metadata society.  
 Genealogy 
 As a symbolic form of the inform a tion 
society, the data base is also the new form 
of the archive of power (yet this aspect is
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
METADATA SOCIETY 
soci et ies. But the machines don’t explain 
anything, you have to analyze the collect-
ive arrange ments of which the machines 
are just one compon ent.  
 Deleuze 1990 
 In his famous ‘Postscript on the Societies 
of Control’ Deleuze envi sioned a form of 
power that is no longer based on the 
produc tion of indi vidu als but on the 
modu la tion of  dividu als . Individuals are 
decon struc ted into numeric foot prints, or 
 dividu als, that are admin is trated through 
‘data banks’: ‘We no longer ﬁ nd ourselves 
dealing with the mass/indi vidual pair. 
Individuals have become “dividu als”, and 
masses, samples, data, markets, or “banks”.’ 
( Deleuze 1992b ) 
 Th e  dividual mirrors and follows the 
idea of  objectile that Deleuze discusses in 
 Th e Fold (1993). Th e  dividu als do not 
simply describe an atom ized subject but 
make possible the posthu man consol id a-
tion of collect ive agents as  condi vidu als, or 
as  super jects. As Deleuze says, follow ing 
Whitehead: ‘Just as the object becomes 
objectile, the subject becomes a super ject’ 
(1993: 21). 1 At least in the domain of the 
digital, data and metadata can be 
considered the  dividu als that are used to 
compose new  super jects , as when data-
bases are used to map social patterns and 
fore cast social trends. As Savat ( 2009 ) 
rightly observes, regard ing the new tech-
niques of modu la tion within the society of 
control, ‘the newly emer ging mode of 
obser va tion is pattern recog ni tion.’ 
 Politics 
 Placing too much stress on the deﬁ n i tion 
of the control society might not leave space 
for polit ical imagin a tion and posthu man 
traject or ies. Deleuze was wonder ing about 
the polit ical outcomes of Foucault’s notion 
of biopol it ics, ‘had he not trapped himself 
within the concept of power rela tions?’ 
organ iz a tions are divided into three 
categor ies: those who create data (both 
consciously and by leaving digital foot-
prints), those who have the means to 
collect it, and those who have the expert-
ise to analyze it. 
 Interestingly, William Gibson’s original 
vision of cyber space was also about an 
‘inﬁ n ite data s cape’ rather than real istic 
spaces of virtual reality or hyper tex tual 
networks: ‘A graphic repres ent a tion of data 
abstrac ted from the banks of every 
computer in the human system. Unthinkable 
complex ity. Lines of light ranged in the 
nonspace of the mind, clusters and constel-
la tions of data. Like city lights, reced ing’ 
( Gibson 1984 ). Gibson’s intu ition of the 
cyber space was already about the problem 
of  meta- navig a tion of vast data oceans. 
 Deleuze registered a similar shift , that is 
from Foucault’s discip lin ary society based 
on the produc tion of the indi vidual to the 
society of control whose power would be 
based on ‘data banks’ and the  modu la tion 
of ﬂ ows of commu nic a tion. 
 We’re deﬁ n itely moving toward ‘control’ 
soci et ies that are no longer exactly discip-
lin ary. Foucault’s oft en taken as the theor-
ist of discip lin ary soci et ies and of their 
prin cipal tech no logy, conﬁ ne ment (not 
just in hospit als and prisons, but in 
schools, factor ies, and barracks). But he 
was actu ally one of the ﬁ rst to say that 
we’re moving away from discip lin ary soci-
et ies, we’ve already left  them behind. We’re 
moving toward control soci et ies that no 
longer operate by conﬁ n ing people but 
through continu ous control and instant 
commu nic a tion . . . One can of course see 
how each kind of society corres ponds to a 
partic u lar kind of machine – with simple 
mech an ical machines corres pond ing to 
sover eign 
soci et ies, 
thermo- dynamic 
machines to discip lin ary soci et ies, cyber-
netic machines and computers to control
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 See also Anthropocene Observatory; 
Algorithm; 
Altergorithm; 
Digital 
Citizenship; Networked Aﬀ ect; Leaks and 
Stings
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
METAMODERNISM 
culture. Others, like Nicolas Bourriaud 
( 2009 ), locate it in the creol iz a tion of the 
arts. Gilles Lipovetsky’s sugges tion for why 
post mod ern ism is out of vogue is hyper-
con sump tion (2005). Th ere are those who 
point to 9/11 and those who focus on the 
ﬁ nan cial crisis, those who single out climate 
change and those who look at post- colo ni-
al ism, object- oriented philo sophy and the 
New Sincerity, the birth of the cyborg and 
the aft er life of human ism. In some cases, 
post mod ern ism is considered old hat 
because culture has changed beyond recog-
ni tion; in others, it is said to be inad equate 
because its tropes have intens i ﬁ ed (see for 
instance  Nealon 2012 ). Many schol ars 
reject the notion of the post mod ern enthu-
si ast ic ally (because they take issue with its 
supposed moral relativ ism, or with pastiche, 
or with post struc tur al ism; see Eshelman’s 
plea for perform at ism (2008), as well as, 
more recently, the program matic philo-
sophies of spec u lat ive realism and accel er a-
tion ism), but there are also plenty who 
abandon it grudgingly. 
 Th e notion of metamod ern ism has 
been developed – neither rever en tially nor 
reluct antly – in dialogue with Fredric 
Jameson’s deﬁ n i tion of post mod ern ism as 
the cultural logic of late capit al ism (1991). 
Here, what is meant by post mod ern ism is 
the ‘senses of an end’ that by the late 
eighties had come to permeate (western) 
polit ics and culture, from Th atcher’s 
 TINA to punk’s ‘no future’, from Andy 
Warhol’s obses sion with surfaces to 
Foucault’s dismissal of psycho ana lysis, the 
eclecticism of Robert Venturi’s archi tec-
ture to Fukuyama’s End of History,  Body 
Heat’s pastiche to the disin teg ra tion of 
the Cartesian subject. In this context, the 
metamod ern struc ture of feeling can be 
described as the belief that this ‘end’ was 
called all too hastily and/or oppor tun ist ic-
ally. Ranging from the popular ity of David 
Foster Wallace’s essays on earn est ness to 
the onset of the twenty- ﬁ rst century. My 
concise account here consists of three 
parts: the end of post mod ern ism; post- 
post mod ern expres sions in arts, culture 
and polit ics; and the metamod ern turn. 
 Th ough, judging from the text books, 
there is still little consensus about what 
post mod ern ism entails, exactly – the 
cultural logic of late capit al ism, an eman-
cip at ory program, a styl istic register char-
ac ter ized by eclecticism, para taxis and 
pastiche, a philo soph ical debate calling 
into ques tion the univer sal iz ing truth 
claims of nine teenth- century academia, or 
a fashion fad, among many others – many 
now believe that the concep tual category 
describes a phenomenon of the past. From 
Josh Toth’s  Th e Passing of Postmodernism 
(2010) to Alan Kirby’s ‘Th e Death of 
Postmodernism and Beyond’ (2006) to the 
V&A’s 2012 obit u ary  Postmodernism: Style 
and Subversion, 1970–1990 , there is a sense 
that the post mod ern idiom, if not entirely 
outdated, is no longer suﬃ   cient to describe 
contem por ary culture. As Linda Hutcheon, 
one of the most pres ci ent critics of the 
post mod ern, wrote in the post script to 
 Th e Politics of Postmodernism , ‘Let’s face it: 
it’s over.’ 
 Th e post mod ern moment has passed, 
even if its discurs ive strategies and its 
ideo lo gical critique continue to live on – 
as do those of modern ism – in our 
contem por ary twenty- ﬁ rst-century world 
. . . histor ical categor ies like modern ism 
and post mod ern ism are, aft er all, only 
heur istic labels that we create in our 
attempts to chart cultural changes and 
continu it ies. 
 2002: 165–6 
 Given the confu sion around the notion of 
the post mod ern, the reasons for its 
perceived outdated ness depend on whose 
account you read. For Kirby ( 2009 ), it 
should be sought in the digit iz a tion of
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 contra dic tio in terminis is ‘as- if’, a compar-
ison ( as ) with a condi tional ( if ), which most 
schol ars, fore most among them perhaps 
Eva Schaper ( 1964–5 ), have ascribed to 
Kant, speciﬁ c ally to his third critique and 
writ ings on history but which applies to 
his whole oeuvre: the inter pret a tion of 
phenom ena  as if they were x, even though 
the inter preter under stands they may well 
be, and must indeed allow for the possib il-
ity that they are y or z. In other words, the 
modern isms post mod ern ism responds to 
are not neces sar ily, or ever, repres ent at ive of 
all modern isms – in any case, as Lyotard’s 
later writ ings also imply, they refer rather 
more oft en to Hegel’s  Indikativ  than to 
Kant’s  Konjunktiv  II . Metamodernism, by 
ques tion ing whether history, art or what-
ever can with certainty end at all, given that 
they may have always already been y or z, 
appears to infer, appre ci at ively or crit ic ally, 
the modern ism of the latter. 
 Th ough by all accounts trail ing in the 
slip stream of the tech no lo gical revolu tions, 
geopol it ical instabil ity, ﬁ nan cial crises and 
ecolo gical devast a tion shift  ing gears in the 
mid-2000s, the metamod ern sens ib il ity 
was not powered by these histor ical kick-
starts – accel er ated, deﬁ n itely; sustained, 
presum ably, but not neces sar ily powered. 
Indeed, many of the prac tices and phenom-
ena considered metamod ern preceded 
these events by years or even decades, the 
consequences of indi vidual, regional or 
gener a tional impulses more than anything 
else. 
 See also Art; Contemporary, the; Ecopathy; 
Gaga Feminism. 
 Note 
 1. See Eric Voegelin ( 1989 ) for a thor ough 
analysis of the notion of metaxy. 
 Timotheus Vermeulen 
the preval ence of mani fes tos in the arts, 
from the hope ful ness of the Arab Spring 
and the Indignados to the radic al iz a tion of 
right- wing polit ics, from book titles like 
the  Rebirth of History ( Badiou 2012 ) and 
 Th e Revenge of History ( Milne 2015 ) to 
sustain able archi tec ture, the so- called 
‘quirky’ cinema ( MacDowell 2012 ) to spec-
u lat ive realism, there is a wide spread 
feeling that this farcical play we call the 
human condi tion has not even ﬁ nished its 
ﬁ rst act – even if no human subjects are to 
parti cip ate aft er the inter val. 
 A contrac tion of metaxy (the word Plato 
uses to describe the onto lo gical irre con cil-
ab il ity of Eros, who was part mortal, part 
divine) 1 and modern ism, metamod ern ism 
can be situ ated at once beyond, with and 
betwixt modern ism and post mod ern ism. 
Th e argu ment is that the posi tions taken by 
the likes of Foster Wallace, the Indignados 
or spec u lat ive realism oscil late between 
strategies we oft en asso ci ate with the 
modern – such as ideo logy, Reason and the 
subject but also Bauhaus – and tactics 
linked to the post mod ern – the end of the 
meta- narrat ive, relativ ism and eclecticism; 
they hark back to past notions of futur ity so 
as to rehis tor icize the posthis tor ical present. 
It would be a mistake there fore to describe 
metamod ern ism simply as either an uncrit-
ical continu ation of the modern ist project 
or an indis crim in ate rejec tion of post-
mod ern posi tions; rather it is a pendu lum 
swinging back and forth between the two, 
one that sways increas ingly errat ic ally, 
increas ingly uncon trol lably: a tragic desire, 
an informed naivety, a prag matic utopi an-
ism, or, in the case of much right- wing 
extrem ism or indeed social media mobs, 
a relativ ism that is also, simul tan eously, 
abso lut ist, occupy ing regard less whatever 
posi tion is oppor tune on the day but with 
the ideo lo gical certainty (and moral self-
 right eous ness) of the funda ment al ist. Th e 
concept van den Akker and myself have
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
METASTABILITY 
relat ive perman ence was that, as Simondon 
explains, they did not have an appro pri ate 
phys ical paradigm to help them make 
sense of such states. ‘In order to deﬁ ne 
meta sta bil ity, it is neces sary to intro duce 
the notion of the poten tial energy resid ing 
in a given system, the notion of order and 
that of an increase in entropy’ (ibid.: 302). 
Only then is it possible to get a ﬁ rm grasp 
of the becom ing of being ‘as it doubles itself 
and falls out of step with itself [ se déphaser ] 
in the process of indi vidu at ing’ (301). 
 Simondon’s notion of the indi vidual 
chal lenges estab lished ideas about oneness 
and same ness in two respects: ﬁ rst, the indi-
vidual is never completely one with itself, 
and second, it is not the whole being but 
merely a phase in the ongoing genesis of 
being. Th e indi vidual, there fore, has only a 
relat ive reality; there is always more to being 
than what is made to appear in a single act 
of indi vidu ation. To come to terms with this 
‘more’, the non- iden tity of the indi vidual 
with itself, Simondon intro duces the notion 
of the ‘prein di vidual’. Th e idea that becom-
ing happens in phases, and that the indi-
vidual has only a relat ive exist ence as an 
expres sion of one of these phases, presup-
poses the exist ence of a prein di vidual state. 
As Muriel Combes succinctly puts it: 
 Before all indi vidu ation, being can be 
under stood as a system contain ing poten-
tial energy. Although this energy becomes 
active within the system, it is called poten-
tial because it requires a trans form a tion 
of the system in order to be struc tured, 
that is, to be actu al ized in accord ance 
with struc tures. Preindividual being, and 
in a general way, any system in a meta-
stable state, harbors poten tials that are 
incom pat ible because they belong to 
hetero gen eous dimen sions of being. 
 Combes 2013: 3–4 
 Th is is why prein di vidual being – conceived 
as a meta stable system rife with poten tials 
 METASTABILITY  
 Th e philo sophy of Gilbert Simondon 
(1924–89) is a key resource for current 
theor iz ing that ques tions the idea of the 
human as a priv ileged and stand- alone 
entity. By oﬀ er ing an alto gether new theory 
of what consti tutes an ‘indi vidual’, he 
eﬀ ect ively chal lenges the basic tenets of 
Western logic and meta phys ics, and with 
that, commonly assumed ideas about unity 
and iden tity. At the same time, Simondon’s 
philo sophy has ines tim able value as a 
correct ive to contem por ary approaches 
that, taking inspir a tion from cyber net ics 
and inform a tion theory, tend to conﬂ ate 
living being and tech nical being on the 
assump tion that there are no signi ﬁ c ant 
diﬀ er ences between humans and other 
intel li gent systems such as machines. 
 Instead of talking about substance, 
matter and form, Simondon conceives of 
the indi vidual in terms of systems and 
states – with special emphasis on the 
notion of ‘meta sta bil ity’, which he borrows 
from ther mo dy nam ics. Th e problem with 
the received ways of conceiv ing the indi-
vidual, whether from the substan tial ist 
view point or from the hylo morphic view-
point, is that there is no proper place for 
the process of indi vidu ation; that is, for the 
genesis of the indi vidual. Classical notions 
of unity and iden tity, which conceives the 
indi vidual either as a self- identical entity or 
as a conjunc tion of form and matter, 
prevent us from under stand ing onto gen-
esis, the becom ing of being. As Simondon 
points out, the ancients, who in their theor-
iz ing recog nized nothing but instabil ity 
and stabil ity, move ment and rest, had no 
clear concep tion of meta sta bil ity. For them, 
being excludes becom ing because ‘being 
was impli citly presumed to be in a state of 
stable equi lib rium at all times’ (1992: 301).  1 
Th e reason why the ancients failed to 
recog nize the exist ence of states with
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
them compat ible. Th e result ing indi vidual 
does not exhaust the poten tials in the 
prein di vidual state. Instead, and due to 
the sustained poten tials, the indi vidual 
contains an inher it ance of prein di vidual 
reality. Th is means that even indi vidu ated 
being retains the char ac ter istic of being 
more- then-one: ‘Th e prein di vidual nature, 
which remains asso ci ated with the indi-
vidual, is a source of future meta stable 
states from which new indi vidu ations 
could even tu ate’ (1992: 306). Th e indi-
vidual, in other words, retains its capa city 
to fall out of step with itself, and to undergo 
a devel op ment that proceeds by ‘quantum 
leaps through a series of success ive [meta-
stable] equi lib ria’ (ibid.: 301). 
 Simondon’s theory of indi vidu ation, 
with its emphasis on conﬂ ic tual systems and 
their discon tinu ous progres sion through a 
series of meta stable states, allows for a new 
under stand ing of unity and iden tity that 
breaks with the clas sical laws of thought, 
ﬁ rst by grant ing pre- emin ence to the 
process of indi vidu ation over the indi vidual, 
and second by recog niz ing that indi vidu-
ation produces more than the indi vidual. 
Th ere is a unity that is more than one, and 
there is an iden tity that incor por ates 
elements other than itself. Th e indi vidual as 
Simondon conceives it is not opposed to 
diﬀ er ence but is born out of tensions and 
sustained by tensions – it even evolves 
thanks to these tensions. As Simondon 
conceives it, being has a ‘trans duct ive unity’ 
(1992: 311). ‘Transduction’ is at once a meta-
phys ical and logical notion, which expresses 
the sense of phys ical, organic and psychic 
processes, and beyond that, within the ﬁ eld 
of know ledge, ‘the actual course that inven-
tion follows’ (repla cing here the notions of 
deduc tion and induc tion) (ibid.: 313). 
 Th is, however, should not be taken to 
mean that all these processes are the 
‘same’ (in the old sense of ‘same ness’ that 
excludes signi ﬁ c ant diﬀ er ences). Rather, he 
– is ‘more- than-one’ (Combes 2013: 5). A 
paradig matic example of a prein di vidual 
regime that goes beyond unity is found in 
quantum mech an ics, with the wave- particle 
duality, which Simondon under stands as 
‘ two ways of express ing the prein di vidual 
state by means of the various mani fest a-
tions exhib ited when it appears as a prein-
di vidual’ (1992: 304). In contrast to a stable 
equi lib rium, a meta stable equi lib rium is 
conﬂ ic tual – but the ‘conﬂ ict’ in ques tion is 
a product ive one: it is the incom pat ib il it ies 
and tensions in the prein di vidual state that 
make indi vidu ation possible, by indu cing 
modi ﬁ c a tions in the system para met ers 
that break the equi lib rium and allow the 
system to dephase (that is, to change its 
state). Simondon expands on the conﬂ ic-
tual nature of meta stable systems: 
  Individuation must there fore be thought 
of as a partial and relat ive resol u tion 
mani fes ted in a system that contains latent 
poten tials and harbors a certain incom-
pat ib il ity with itself, an incom pat ib il ity 
due at once to forces in tension as well as 
to the impossib il ity of inter ac tion between 
terms of extremely dispar ate dimen sions.  
 Simondon 1992 : 300 
 Individuation, then, is conceived as process 
of medi ation that brings into commu nic a-
tion dispar ate elements that, in the prein-
di vidual system, belonged to ‘diﬀ er ent 
orders of magnitude’. Simondon explains: 
 At the same time that a quant ity of poten tial 
energy (the neces sary condi tion for a higher 
order of magnitude) is actu al ized, a portion 
of matter is organ ized and distrib uted (the 
neces sary condi tion for a lower order of 
magnitude) into struc tured indi vidu als of a 
 middle order of magnitude, devel op ing by 
a mediate process of ampli ﬁ c a tion  
 1992: 304 
 Th us under stood, indi vidu ation is a 
process that sustains poten tials by making
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MONSTER/THE UNHUMAN 
the unre solved system becomes an organ iz-
ing dimen sion in its resol u tion ’ (1992: 311). 
 In conclu sion, to return to the issue of 
the rela tion between humans and intel li-
gent machines, an idea could be not to 
under stand this rela tion by redu cing one 
to the other, but rather, to under stand this 
rela tion as an ampli fy ing coup ling of tech-
nics and life in Simondon’s sense, that is, as 
a medi ation across dispar ate dimen sions 
that releases new poten tials. 
 See also  AI (Artiﬁ cial Intelligence); 
Naturecultures; Negentropy; Ontological 
Turn; Posthumanism; Process Ontologies; 
Technicity.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
MONSTER/THE UNHUMAN
impris on ment of subject form a tion by 
congeal ing a concrete form dubbed  Man , 
marked by invol un tary perman ence, ‘so 
the State betrays its enmity to me by 
demand ing that I be a man . . . it imposes 
being a man upon me as a duty. Further, it 
desires me to do nothing along with which 
it cannot last; so its perman ence is to be 
sacred for me’ ( Stirner 1845b ). Th e creation 
of State- based communit ies, with moral, 
civic subjects consti tutes an immob ile 
fetter ing which denies entit ies the possib-
ility of foster ing a person al ist self- 
actu alization, that is to say egoism, ‘the 
State is a society of men, not a union of 
egos . . . there fore we two, the State and I, 
are enemies. I anni hil ate it, and form in its 
place the Union of Egoists’ (ibid.). Th e 
union of egoists thus consists of free inter-
act ive agents who volun tar ily decide to 
engage with, or conversely abstain from, 
one another, as juxta posed with State- 
borne subjects, Men, whose very creation 
and engage ment is modu lated by dictated 
desig na tion inscribed in legal and social 
codas. 
 As Stirner points out, however, the 
creation of a stand ard idea of ‘Man’ in turn 
logic ally implies the exist ence of its nega-
t ive, the un- man (e.g. ‘ man stands against 
 men , or, as men are not man, man stands 
against the un- man’ (1845b)). Th is latter 
ﬁ gure being that which looms at the edges 
of civil ized society, which must always be 
reined in and kept at bay via the impos i-
tion of State/Church- sponsored moral ism, 
as mani fes ted through the threat of 
demonic forces in the church or the ruth-
less law breaker by the State. Th e spell of 
essen tial ism is thus here undone by bring-
ing to the fore its latent foil, its malinger ing 
other without which the liberal subject, 
Man, would be unable to consti tute itself. 
Stirner’s active intro duc tion or fore front-
ing of the unman into the discourse of 
subjec ti ﬁ c a tion serves to destabil ize said 
to say that it is immune to situ ational inter-
ac tion or rela tion al ity, but instead to high-
light that the monstrous is a rejec tion of 
the stiﬂ ing non/human binary entrap-
ment. 1 Th e monster is not an abstract 
concep tu al iz a tion, but an instant an eous, 
enacted entan gle ment. It is a trans it ory 
enmeshed align ment situ ated in the imme-
di acy of praxis. Th e monster is thus a 
continu ous, unstable project of both disas-
sembly or ex- ﬁ gur a tion and of unsanc-
tioned coup ling; concrete and rela tional, it 
is a prac ticed hybrid ity of form which 
eludes concep tual form al iz a tion, exist ing 
as it does as a state of contest a tion and 
troub ling – shift  ing, adjust ing, and dissolv-
ing at whim. 
 Th e essen tial ist spell of subject form a-
tion is undone not merely by the bring ing 
to the fore of its latent foil, the anti- human, 
its malinger ing other without which the 
liberal subject, the (hu)man, would be 
unable to consti tute itself, but through a 
destabil iz a tion of the entire notion of 
congealed subject- form a tion in the ﬁ rst 
place via a repu di ation of its ines cap ab il ity. 
Th e unhuman is thus not a simplistic nega-
tion of the human, but a poly morph ous, 
monstrous aber ra tion of the unitary, 
human istic and anthro po centric subject 
form in its entirety. Let us now turn to a 
brief analysis of how the monster mani-
fests itself in the dissid ent writ ings of Max 
Stirner, before examin ing a case study of a 
modern- day monster: the data pirate.   
 Monstrous Unions 
 A  union of egoists – a free- form, self- 
construc ted, 
volun tary 
rela tion al ity 
formed amongst cogniz ant actants – is a 
notion intro duced in the nine teenth 
century by Max Stirner via its juxta pos i-
tion to the liberal project of subject 
construc tion. Th e State and the Church, for 
Stirner, are both inter ested in impos ing the
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MONSTER/THE UNHUMAN 
the stiﬂ ing dicho tomy of State- produced 
subjectiv ity itself.  
 Realization, not Conceptualization 
 But how, concretely, could monsters and 
their unions come about? A common 
critique of Stirner made both in the nine-
teenth century ( Stirner 1845a ) and in the 
twen ti eth ( Newman 2010a : 160,  2010b : 43), 
is that the under ly ing concep tu al iz a tion of 
monstrous coup lings is left  unsat is fact or ily 
vague. A notion of egoist monsters 
congreg at ing and enact ing real it ies disjoin-
ted from State- sanc tioned subject form a-
tions is tantal iz ing indeed, but how may it 
actu ally be mani fes ted? Stirner is tent at ive 
on the matter, albeit precisely to preclude 
the very trap of  a priori concep tual congeal-
ment which the monster strives to escape; 
that is to say, Stirner inten tion ally avoids a 
prolonged blue print ing of the union of 
egoists precisely to avoid the possib il ity 
of the monsters’ entomb ment into a pre-
script ive and oppress ive enclos ure of 
premed it ated form and func tion. 
 In lieu of a concep tu al iz a tion of the 
monster, Stirner instead points to the fact 
that hundreds of poten tial monstrous 
unions happen daily, citing a myriad of 
examples ranging from chil dren coming 
together on the street to engage in an 
impromptu round of play; to falling in love 
(1845a). Th us we here see the union of 
egoists iden ti ﬁ ed as a lived exper i ence, char-
ac ter ized by the under ly ing facets of volun-
tary asso ci ation and self- organ iz a tion: ‘the 
union of egoists is not a concept but a name 
used to refer to each of the partic u lar 
instances of indi vidu als acting together’ 
( Landstreicher 2012 ). We can there fore read 
the union of egoists not as a concrete 
concep tu al iz a tion, a recipe for congeal ment 
of subjectiv ity, but as a  rela tional actu al iz a-
tion , or an  assemblage . Th e monstrous union 
of egoists is neither a theor et ical tool nor a 
subject form a tion via a repu di ation of its 
ines cap ab il ity; or in other words, the 
unman oﬀ ers a way out of the conﬁ nes of 
human ist subject form a tion ( Newman 
2001a : 67, 2001b: 309–30). Th at this simple 
logical foil exists as a latent shadow in 
every discus sion of the liberal subject is 
also what creates the possib il ity of a rejec-
tion thereof. 
 And yet the monster is not mere nega-
tion, for a nega tion func tions via, and thus 
is depend ent on, the invoc a tion, impli cit or 
other wise, of its dialect ical converse – Man 
( Stirner 1845b ). Instead, as Feiten points 
out ( 2013 : 129), Stirner ulti mately rejects 
the un/man binary alto gether: ‘[I] shall not 
ask hence for ward whether I am man or 
un- man in what I set about; let this spirit 
keep oﬀ  my neck’ (1845b)! In place of the 
un/man, Stirner postu lates the egoist; and 
in place of the State, composed as it is of 
men, there is the union of egoists. For 
Stirner, the ﬁ gure of the egoist func tions as 
a signi fy ing other which serves to high-
light the possib il ity of  things not as they 
are , of the exist ence of other formu la tions 
of social cohe sion aside from the State, 
namely a union of egoists freely inter act-
ing as self- construc tion as opposed to 
those under the weight of imposed 
subjectiv ity, the oppres sion brought on by 
being moral men. 
 Going further, however, it is here pivotal 
to elucid ate that the term Stirner uses 
for what is liter ally trans lated as the 
‘unman’ –  unmensch – also means  monster 
( Landstreicher 2011 ). Th e egoist is thus 
not a simplistic nega tion of the (hu)man, 
but a poly morph ous, monstrous aber ra-
tion of the subject form. Crucially, Haraway 
deploys a similar vocab u lary, observing 
that ‘[c]yborg unities are monstrous and 
ille git im ate’ 
(1991), 
further 
situ at ing 
Stirner as partak ing in the tunnel ling 
towards the posthu man. Th e ‘un- man’ is 
thus no mere nega tion, but a disrup tion of
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
MONSTER/THE UNHUMAN
alone. Data pirates come together to engage 
in the free promul ga tion of said data due to 
an expli citly expressed interest in unshack-
ling the fetters of intel lec tual prop erty – that 
the interest may be expressed  in action as 
opposed to via ancil lary written pronounce-
ment thereof is irrel ev ant to the fact that 
said tacit proclam a tion is always- already 
self- contained in the act alone. 
 Adopting ever- new means of data 
dispersal and modes of content protec tion 
circum ven tion, once discrete acts of piracy 
are complete, pirate bands may then 
disband, while other groups coalesce in 
their own turn, and so on. Given that any 
number of release groups – tempor ary 
conclaves of data pirates – enga ging in 
their monstrous unions to freely dissem in-
ate cultural know ledge exist at any given 
time, monsters are hence not merely all 
around, but the pirat ical monster is instead 
an all- pervas ive permeation which satur-
ates and viol ates the coer cive oper a tion of 
statist subject- form a tion. Unions of pirat-
ical monsters, in other words, consti tute an 
ever- ongoing, multi far i ous project of both 
disas sembly and unsanc tioned coup ling, 
eschew ing the stag na tion of stasis at all 
costs in favour of unbridled dissem in a tion. 
Enacted as a prac tice of rela tion, that 
encom passes its resist ance in the act itself, 
the monstrous, unhuman coming together 
of the union of egoists or data pirates are 
thus marked by monstrous inde term in acy, 
and thus by a vibrant poten ti al ity that is 
devoid of prescribed modes of subjectiv ity. 
 See also Bodies Politic; Critical Posthuman 
Th eory; In/Human; In-Human; Zombie. 
 Note 
 1. Portions of this entry have previ ously 
appeared in the author’s doctoral disser-
ta tion ( Mazurov 2015 ). 
 Nikita Mazurov 
concep tual model for subject construc tion 
and inter ac tion, but a prac tised hybrid ity of 
form which eludes concep tual form al iz a-
tion, exist ing as it does as a bit of poly-
morph ous code; shift  ing, adjust ing, and 
dissolv ing at whim, predic ated upon an 
immin ent potency of dissol u tion, an always- 
unbind ing imper man ence ( Stirner 1845b ).  
 Piratical Monsters 
 Monstrous coup lings, in their rejec tion of 
State- sanc tioned subjectiv ity, pave the way 
for the poten ti al ity of ‘bring ing dispar ate 
groups together to “union ize” on a found a-
tion of shared crimin al ity’ ( Antliﬀ  2011 : 
162). One such modern- day mani fest a tion 
may perhaps be observed in situ ational 
data piracy – those monsters who come 
together to engage in the contest a tion of 
so- called intel lec tual prop er ties by enga-
ging in the illicit unbridled dissem in a tion 
of inform a tion via the un author ized digital 
distri bu tion of various outputs of cultural 
produc tion. 
 Notably, there is no singu lar, mono lithic 
ﬁ gur a tion of the data pirate; instead, ‘greatly 
varied and contrast ing envir on ments create 
very diﬀ er ent types of pirates and many 
diﬀ er ent piracy scenes’ ( Craig 2005 : 160). 
Th ere is thus a plur al ity of piracies, span-
ning geo- and cyber- spatial local it ies and 
inter activ it ies, with ‘piracy itself [being] 
diﬃ   cult to pinpoint’ ( Lechner 2015 : 21). 
Monstrous pirate unions are formed of 
those who – notably through their actions, 
not through abstract concep tu al iz a tion – 
reject the author it arian desig na tion of the 
author func tion as enforced via the tech no-
lo gic ally- medi ated and State- backed enact-
ment of various intel lec tual prop erty laws. 
Hence, the self- actu al iz a tion of the monsters 
compos ing these unions need not come 
from developed mani fes tos writing about 
their disdain for said stric tures, for it instead 
stems from the enacted prac tice of piracy
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MULTISPECIES 
and endanger the entire planet, others are 
turning to the  topos  of territ ory, soil and 
city. Multispecies ethno graph ers and 
artists are follow ing Donna Haraway, 
who insists: I am a creature of the mud, not 
the sky. Agitating against Anthropocene 
discourse, multis pe cies studies involves 
writing and making culture in a mode that 
is less anthro po centric than prevail ing 
trends. In blasted land scapes that have 
been trans formed by multiple cata-
strophes, ethno graph ers and artists are 
illu min at ing modest sites of biocul tural 
hope. 
 Timothy Ingold has recently sugges ted 
that we abandon the multis pe cies idiom 
since the notion of  species itself is a human 
construct. ‘Only in the purview of a univer-
sal human ity’, he main tains, ‘does the world 
of living things appear as a cata logue of 
biod iversity, as a plur al ity of species’ (2000: 
217). Paying clear atten tion to the ebb and 
ﬂ ow of agency in multis pe cies worlds 
reveals that humans are not alone in our 
prac tices that group kinds of life on the 
basis of simil ar ity and divide others on the 
basis of diﬀ er ence. Diverse organ isms 
engage in processes of recog ni tion, diﬀ er-
en ti ation, and clas si ﬁ c a tion – bring ing 
them selves and others into being as 
‘species’. In other words, species emerge as 
entangled agents  become with one another 
in common worlds. As beings redis cover 
each other in intergen er a tional dances, 
species persist across time and space. 
Species also some times  become beside 
them selves, to para phrase Brian Rotman 
( 2008 ), they are inter mit tently present to 
them selves, becom ing multiple and paral-
lel, with glee and dissol u tion. 
 Species involve a multi tude. Emerging 
ﬁ nd ings about micro bial compan ion species 
give a new twist to Annemarie Mol’s 
sugges tion that bodies are ‘an intric ately 
coordin ated crowd’ (2002: viii). If species 
some times appear to be in isol a tion, perhaps 
 MULTISPECIES  
 Rather than simply celeb rate the fact of 
multis pe cies ming ling, it is better to begin 
with the ques tion:  cui bono (who bene ﬁ ts) 
when species meet? Creatures once 
conﬁ ned to the realm of  zoe , or bare life 
which is killable – have started to appear 
along side humans in the domain of  bios , 
with legible biograph ical and polit ical lives 
in the social sciences and the envir on-
mental human it ies. Rather than make other 
kinds of crit ters count only as conscious 
agents, 
networked 
actors, 
inten tional 
commu nic at ors or ethical subjects, the ﬁ eld 
of multis pe cies studies assumes that other 
organ isms do not have to show their human 
equi val ence. Th e notion of the ‘non- human’ 
is like ‘non- white’ – imply ing the lack of 
some thing. 
 Departing from ‘the ques tion of the 
animal,’ the polemic by Jacques Derrida 
arguing that ‘the human–animal distinc-
tion can no longer and ought no longer be 
main tained’, the ﬁ eld of multis pe cies 
studies also engages with ‘the ques tion of 
the fungus’ and ‘the ques tion of the plant’ 
( Derrida 2008 ). Fungi illus trate ‘prac tices 
that thrive in the “gap” between what is 
taken as wild and what is taken as domest-
ic ated,’ accord ing to the Matsutake Worlds 
Research Group ( 2009 ). ‘Th inking like a 
fungus’ opens up ques tions like: ‘Who is 
doing the domest ic at ing? And to what 
end?’  Plant-Th inking , the recent book by 
Michael Marder, regards plants as ‘collect-
ive beings,’ as ‘non- total iz ing assemblages 
of multi pli cit ies, inher ently polit ical spaces 
of convi vi al ity’ (2013). 
 Multispecies studies involves prac tising 
the art of noti cing; it involves passion ate 
immer sion in the lives of others. In an era 
when many posthu man thinkers have 
turned their atten tion to global climate 
change, an era when the agency and action 
of  anthro pos has been scaled up to embrace
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
we are part of; it entails that matter, while 
consti tut ing this universe, would also be 
actu al iz ing an indeﬁ n ite number of other 
universes, in a process of both rela tion al ity 
and autonomy. As a meta phor and a 
thought exper i ment, the notion of the 
multi verse greatly expands a spec u lat ive 
percep tion of the self, by relat ing the indi-
vidual to other realms of exist ence which 
may go beyond a one- dimen sional analysis. 
Th e notion of the multi verse can also be 
approached from a scale perspect ive of 
bodies within bodies: for instance, from the 
micro scopic level of the bacteria living in 
our internal organs, the human body itself 
can be seen as a universe; that speciﬁ c 
human body, within the context of the 
human species, can be considered a 
universe within a multi verse. 
 Here, it is import ant to note that, even 
though the notion of the multi verse radic-
ally decon structs any dual istic paradigm, 
the current scientiﬁ c percep tions of the 
multi verse are actu ally conceived through 
the self/others, here/there analo gies, in an 
approach which reson ates with tradi tional 
human ism, based on the neces sity of the 
others as reverse mirrors of the self. On one 
side, these other universes are depic ted to 
be so far that they will never be reached 
( Tegmark 2010 ); on the other, they are 
invest ig ated through the anthro po centric 
desire of postu lat ing diﬀ er ent worlds with 
‘people with the same appear ance, name 
and memor ies as you’ (ibid.: 559). Th e 
double is oft en contem plated as a possib il ity 
within the scientiﬁ c liter at ure related to the 
multi verse and is at the very core of Hugh 
Everett’s proposal of the many- worlds inter-
pret a tion (1956), which focuses on the 
human- centric fascin a tion with the idea of 
universes in which there might be other 
versions of ‘me’, in a re- inscrip tion of the 
multi verse within the frame of egocentric 
assim il a tions, instead of a situ ated acknow-
ledg ment of ontic diﬀ er ences. 
it is just because of the limits of our own 
epistem o lo gies and prac tices. Joe Dumit’s 
micro bi opol it ical dictum states: ‘Never think 
you know all the species involved in a 
decision. Corollary: Never think you speak 
for all of your self’ ( 2008 : xii). 
 See also  Biological Arts/Living Arts; 
Animism (Limulus); Epigenetic Landscape; 
Non- human Agency; Anthropocene and 
Chthulucene; Kin; Symbiogenesis. 
 Eben Kirksey 
 MULTIVERSE  
 Th e multi verse is a crucial notion in the 
frame of posthu man ism and new mater i al-
ism, repres ent ing, symbol ic ally and mater-
i ally, the ulti mate decent ral iz a tion of the 
human. Its relev ance consists in decon-
struct ing the possib il ity of any epistem o lo-
gical or onto lo gical centre, not allow ing for 
any type of cent rism (from anthro po-
centrism to universe- cent rism). On one 
side, it stands as the next step in the human 
revi sion of its spati otem poral loca tion, 
which, in the Western history of Astronomy, 
ﬁ rst posed the Earth at its centre, accord ing 
to the Ptolemaic geocentric model. Th en, 
shift  ing to the helio centric model based on 
the contri bu tions of Nicolaus Copernicus 
(1473–1543), it located the Sun at the 
centre, to later realize that our solar system 
is part of a galaxy, and that this galaxy is 
one among many, in a universe which, 
accord ing to current scientiﬁ c research 
(from quantum physics to the ﬁ elds of 
cosmo logy and astro phys ics), may be part 
of a multi verse. 1 Th e notion of the multi-
verse can be approached both as a meta-
phor and as an actual conﬁ g ur a tion of 
matter ( Kaku 2005 ;  Greene 2011 ). As a 
mater ial hypo thesis, it may uncon ceal a 
possible phys ical make- up of the universe
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
MULTIVERSE 
terms of the posthu man multi verse; both 
should be listed in order to disrupt the 
dualism one/many, thus avoid turning this 
discus sion into the problem of the origins 
(is it a mon ism before being a plur al ism, 
or a plur al ism before being a monism?). 
Th e rhizome (Deleuze and Guattari 1980) 
oﬀ ers numer ous insights for a posthu man 
devel op ment of the multi verse, even 
though philo soph ic ally the two notions 
cannot be assim il ated. For instance, the 
posthu man multi verse does not neces sar-
ily exclude the notion of a struc ture, but 
approaches it in a process- onto lo gical 
way. 6  In the frame of the multi verse, 
humans, as any other mani fest a tions 
of being, can be perceived as nodes of 
becom ing in mater ial networks; such 
becom ings operate as tech no lo gies of the 
multi verse, 
as 
modes 
of ‘reveal ing’ 
( Heidegger 1954 ), thus re- access ing the 
onto lo gical and exist en tial signi ﬁ c a tions 
of tech no logy itself. In such a frame, the 
multi verse can be perceived as a mater ial 
and meta phor ical path of self- discov ery, 
once the self has been recog nized as the 
others within. 
 See also Earth; Mattering; Ontological 
Turn; Process Ontologies; Posthuman 
Critical Th eory; Terrestial; Planetary.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 6. In this sense, the speciﬁ c vibra tions 
which, accord ing to the String Th eory 
( Randall 2005 ;  Susskind 2006 ), would 
allow the coher ence of each dimen sion 
of the multi verse, could be seen as a 
type of vibra tional struc ture, even if 
not a deﬁ n it ive nor an essen tial one. It 
is import ant to note that, currently, 
String Th eory is a math em at ical model 
not yet suppor ted by exper i mental evi-
d ence, and so it has been criti cized for its 
lack of falsiﬁ  ab il ity (Woit 2007;  Smolin 
2006 ).    
 Francesca Ferrando 
   4. For instance, Tim Wilkinson, in his article 
‘Th e Multiverse Conundrum’ (2012),
NATURECULTURES 
from an agnostic stand point (cf.  Latour 
and Woolgar [1979] 1986 ). 
 Haraway ( 2003 : 2) writes in the opening 
section of  Th e Companion Species Manifesto : 
‘In layers of history, layers of biology, layers 
of nature cul tures, complex ity is the name of 
our game.’ And in addi tion to complex ity, 
nature cul tures are about emer gence. Th e 
complex ity of nature cul tures points at the 
impossib il ity of separ at ing domains such as 
history and biology in tech nos cience and 
every day life alike. Any biolo gical ques tion 
has an imme di ate histor ical dimen sion and 
any histor ical issue is entangled with bio-
lo gical processes and phenom ena.  Th e 
Companion Species Manifesto  explains this 
state of entan gle ment through the example 
of how dogs and humans relate on the West 
Coast of the United States. Both dogs and 
humans have played their part in histor ies 
of colon iz a tion and colon iz ing processes 
have aﬀ ected dog–dog, dog–sheep, dog–
human, human–human and many other 
relat ings. All of these are still ongoing on 
the many entangled layers of history and 
biology in the twenty- ﬁ rst century (cf. 
 DeLanda 2000 ). 
 We Have Never Been Modern presents 
Latour’s theory of modern ity as a process 
whose ‘text book 
version’ 
has 
never 
happened in actu al ity. In actu al ity, any 
process of modern iz a tion is at least double: 
 Modernity is oft en deﬁ ned in terms of 
human ism, either as a way of salut ing the 
birth of ‘man’ or as a way of announ cing 
his death. But this habit itself is modern, 
 NATURECULTURES  
 Th e concepts of ‘nature cul tures’ and 
‘natures- cultures’ both denote the onto lo-
gical prior ity of relat ings over related 
beings and domains of being. Prioritizing 
relat ings entails a perspect ive on the 
coming into being of bounded subjects, 
objects and domains such as the natural 
and the cultural. Priority is given to study-
ing how, where and for whom bound ar ies 
are drawn. Bounded domains of being as 
well as the beings within them are said to be 
end results of complex relat ings. In these 
relat ings both bound ar ies between separ ate 
domains and indi vidual beings come about 
as well as the rela tions among domains and 
the rela tions among beings emerge. More 
oft en than not such rela tions emerge as 
hier arch ical. Th erefore, nature(s-)cultures 
have to do with onto logy, epistem o logy and 
ethics. 
 Th e gene a logy of the concept of nature-
cul tures diﬀ ers slightly from the gene a logy 
of natures- cultures. Th e ﬁ rst concept 
(nature cul tures) is Donna Haraway’s and 
stands in the tradi tion of femin ist and 
anti- racist schol ar ship into tech nos cience 
and (or: as) every day life. Th e term features 
prom in ently in  Th e Companion Species 
Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Signiﬁ cant 
Otherness ( Haraway 2003 ). Th e second 
concept of natures- cultures comes from 
Bruno Latour’s book  We Have Never Been 
Modern ([1991] 1993) and is based in 
science and tech no logy studies as the 
anthro po lo gical study of ‘labor at ory life’ 
 N
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
because it remains asym met rical. It 
overlooks the simul tan eous birth of 
‘nonhu man ity’ – things, or objects, or 
beasts – and the equally strange begin-
ning of a crossed- out God, releg ated to 
the side lines. 
 Latour [1991] 1993 : 13 
 As an anthro po lo gist of science and tech-
no logy, Latour is inves ted in the study of 
the culture of tech nos ciencelabs. Th is 
 culture puri ﬁ es its labor at ory life as 
pertain ing to the  natural domain only. 
Latour demon strates that this puri ﬁ c a tion 
is a consequence of what his and Haraway’s 
colleague Sharon Traweek ( 1988 ) calls a 
‘culture of no culture’, the assump tion that 
objectiv ity is at work and that gender, 
racism and other power dynam ics are 
hence forth (or: natur ally) kept at bay. 
Laboratories are assumed to be quint es-
sen tial ivory towers. Th e point is, however, 
that ‘All natures- cultures are similar in that 
they simul tan eously construct humans, 
divin it ies and nonhu mans’ ( Latour [1991] 
1993 : 106). In order to come up with a fully 
bounded human subject (the lab scient ist), 
one needs to assume the messi ness of the 
nature studied. And in order to study and 
capture messy nature as consist ing of 
purely phys ical processes and phenom ena, 
the scient ist has simul tan eously to assume 
a God’s eye view and to rule out the 
processes and phenom ena being of divine 
(i.e. immor tal and uncap tur able) nature. 
 Both Haraway and Latour study how 
nature and culture as bounded domains 
and the natural and cultural beings within 
these domains come into being and how 
this process is ‘never ﬁ nished, whole, 
simply there and original’ ( Haraway 1988 : 
586). Domains and beings do not pre- exist 
in nature(s-)cultures. What pre- exists in 
nature(s-)cultures are local ‘collect ives’ 
( Latour [1991] 1993 : 107), and the collect-
ives as well as the relat ings within them are 
nothing but partial and temporal. In other 
words, ‘All collect ives are diﬀ er ent from 
one another in the way they divide up 
beings, in the prop er ties they attrib ute to 
them, in the mobil iz a tion they consider 
accept able. Th ese diﬀ er ences consti tute 
count less small divides, and there is no 
longer a Great Divide to take one apart 
from all the others’ ( Latour [1991] 1993 : 
107). Th e modern assump tion of the Great 
Divide between nature and culture was not 
only onto lo gic ally false but also wrong-
do ing in its gendered, racial ized and 
colon iz ing eﬀ ects. 
 See 
also 
Cosmopolitics; 
Ecosophy; 
Econtology; 
(Material) 
Ecocriticism; 
Ecomaterialism; Medianatures; Terrestial; 
Symbiogenesis. 
 Iris van der Tuin  
 NECROPOLITICS  
 As Michel Foucault ( 2003 ,  2008 ) outlined 
in his seminal work on biopol it ics, the late 
eight eenth century saw the emer gence of 
biopower, a new polit ical economy of 
govern ment al ity that included strategies 
focused on the systemic monit or ing and 
regu la tion of living organ isms. Th ese 
included both human and non- human 
life- forms (see for instance agri cul tural 
tech niques, water manage ment and animal 
husbandry) and the manage ment of popu-
la tions through demo graph ics, health and 
hygiene and modern ized poli cing tech-
niques. Th e bio- polit ical manage ment of 
early modern times was simul tan eously 
prag matic and instru mental. It intro duced 
signi ﬁ c ant innov a tions into the notion of 
‘making live and letting die’, which had 
been oper a tional in the polit ical economy 
of sover eignty since medi eval times. Bio- 
polit ical govern ment al ity marked a signi-
ﬁ c ant shift  from the exer cise of abso lut ist
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NECROPOLITICS 
power to ‘let live and make die’ by a 
singu lar sover eign over the hier arch ic ally 
organ ized people. As Foucault put it, this 
new govern ment al ity brought into being 
a modern ized notion of the social body 
and of the subjects that embod ied it. Bio- 
polit ics exerts social and polit ical power 
over a new type of social body: 
 not exactly society . . . nor is it the indi-
vidual- as-body. It is a new body, a multiple 
body, a body with so many heads that, 
while they might not be inﬁ n ite in 
number, cannot neces sar ily be counted. 
Biopolitics deals with the popu la tion, 
with the popu la tion as a social problem, 
as a problem that is at once scientiﬁ c and 
polit ical, as a biolo gical problem and as 
power’s problem. 
 Foucault 2003 : 245 
 Th is popu la tion as the target of bio- 
political manage ment includes human and 
non- human agents, which in turn require 
modes of governance that combine the 
produc tion of know ledge, the gath er ing of 
inform a tion and the inven tion and imple-
ment a tion of updated forms of monit or ing 
and control. It is a mixed polit ical economy 
where discourse and/as power produces a 
new type of social subject: the informed 
and willing citizen who self- imple ments 
the basic rules of law. 
 Now more than three decades aft er this 
insight ful analysis, it remains ‘urgent to 
assess the state of the theor et ical debates 
on bio- power aft er Foucault, espe cially in 
terms of its legal, polit ical and ethical 
implic a tions’ ( Braidotti 2007 ). In a post co-
lo nial, neo- imper ial, neolib eral era in 
which tech no lo gies of destruc tion are not 
only more ubiquit ous but are also more 
tactile ( Mbembe 2003 : 34), how to account 
for death and dying? Here, Achille 
Mbembe oﬀ ers a supple ment or correct ive 
to Foucauldian notions of biopol it ics in 
asking: 
 Is the notion of biopower suﬃ   cient to 
account for the contem por ary ways in 
which the polit ical, under the guise of 
war, of resist ance, or of the ﬁ ght against 
terror, makes the murder of the enemy its 
primary and abso lute object ive? . . . What 
place is given to life, death, and the human 
body (in partic u lar the wounded or slain 
body)? How are they inscribed in the 
order of power? 
 Mbembe 2003 : 12 
 Life and death can, of course, not be separ-
ated and Foucault is the ﬁ rst to recog nize it, 
going so far as to coin the term ‘thanatos- 
polit ics’. In contem por ary crit ical theory, 
biopol it ics and necro pol it ics are not oppos-
ites but rather two sides of the same coin 
( Braidotti 2007 ;  Mbembe 2003 ). Th ey func-
tion like bifocal lenses that allow us to 
analyse power rela tions and examine the 
inex tric able polit ics of life and death. 
Moving away from Foucault, necro pol it ics 
as a theor et ical paradigm of analysis is 
concerned with how life is subjug ated to the 
power of death ( Mbembe 2003 : 39). It asks 
who gets to live and who must die (or who 
must live and who is let die), in the contem-
por ary polit ical economy, thereby putting 
forth a diﬀ er ent hypo thesis from clas sical 
bio- power. Necropolitics uncov ers the 
mech an isms 
whereby 
certain 
bodies 
nowadays are ‘cultiv ated’ or grown for the 
purpose of enhan cing life and (re)produc-
tion, while others are marked for or 
neglected into death. Th is shift  of prior it ies 
constructs a new polit ical economy based 
on constantly shift  ing bound ar ies between 
‘legit im ate’ subjects, indexed on life, and ‘ille-
git im ate’ non- subjects, indexed on death. 
 Mbembe developed the concept of 
necro pol it ics to account for contem por ary 
warfare and the various ways in which 
‘weapons are deployed in the interest of 
maximum destruc tion of persons and the 
creat ing of  death- worlds , new and unique 
forms of social exist ence in which vast
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
life’ ( Mbembe 2003 : 40). Th ese death- 
worlds, which denote not only phys ical 
death but also social and polit ical death, 
aﬀ ect entire popu la tions, ‘confer ring upon 
them the status of  living dead ’ ( Mbembe 
2003 : 40). Similarly, slow death ( Berlant 
2007 : 754), and slow viol ence ( Rob Nixon, 
2011 ), that is to say the phys ical exhaus tion 
and dimin ish ment or elim in a tion of 
certain human and non- human popu la-
tions, is a deﬁ n ing mark of the contem por-
ary era. 
 More recently, this theor et ical lens has 
been cogently applied within queer studies. 
Jasbir K. Puar ( 2007 ) made signi ﬁ c ant 
inroads into this now-growing ﬁ eld of 
queer necro pol it ics, inter rog at ing which 
queer lives can repro duce life and which 
are left  to die or are actively targeted for 
killing. In their recently published volume 
 Queer Necropolitics , Jin Haritaworn, Adi 
Kuntsman and Silvia Posocco have pushed 
this paradigm further to show how the 
necro pol it ical can be read as ‘a tool to 
make sense of the symbi otic co- pres ence 
of life and death, mani fes ted ever more 
clearly in the cleav ages between rich and 
poor, citizens and non- citizens (and those 
who can be stripped of citizen ship); the 
cultur ally, morally, econom ic ally valu able 
and the patho lo gical; queer subjects 
invited into life and queerly abjec ted popu-
la tions marked for death’ (2014: 2). In this 
volume, Foucault’s and Mbembe’s found a-
tional think ing around biopol it ics and 
necro pol it ics form the frame for deeper 
and more inclus ive theor et ical engage-
ments, even as they are indeed queered. 
 Posocco under scores the connec tion 
between ‘queer’ and ‘necro pol it ics’: ‘A 
consequence of the shift  to a biopol it ical 
and necro pol it ical theor et ical register is 
precisely the detach ment of “queer ness” 
from one of its key refer ents, i.e., “gay and 
lesbian” ’ (2014: 84). In connot ing ‘those 
whose bodies are marked by racial ized and 
sexu al ized tech no lo gies and produced 
through the  dispos i tifs of race and sexu al ity 
for death, includ ing social death’, queer ness 
has the poten tial to disrupt power struc tures 
and 
necro pol it ical 
networks 
(ibid.). 
Countering a focus on iden tity categor ies 
that might fall under the  LGBT umbrella 
and 
chal len ging 
hetero norm at ive, 
homonorm at ive 
and 
trans norm at ive 
assump tions and priv ileges, queer ing necro-
pol it ics illu min ates the ways in which 
norm ativ ity is linked to neo- colo nial and 
neo- imper i al ist processes and how the 
biopol it ical and the necro pol it ical continue 
to exert life- and death- giving forces that 
have gendered and racial ized dimen sions. 
 Here, ‘queer necro pol it ics’ serves as a 
concept- meta phor to illu min ate ambi val-
ent processes of exclu sion and inclu sion, 
signi fy ing how inclu sion itself can also 
be viewed as deadly. As Haritaworn, 
Huntsman and Posocco incis ively ask, ‘If 
modern genders and sexu al it ies (both 
domin ant and subor din ate) have been 
formed against constitutive Others whose 
prim it iv ity is signi ﬁ ed as perversity – and 
as a failure to perform proper gender 
binar ies – what is at stake in seeing inclu-
sion through or into these iden tit ies?’ 
(2014: 3–4). A queer take on necro pol it ics 
further bolsters a frame work for analys ing 
life and death in an ever- increas ingly 
neolib eral envir on ment that folds in some 
previ ously othered others while marking 
other others for social extinc tion and 
social death ( Patterson 1982 ), partic u larly 
those who exper i ence inter sect ing forms 
of oppres sion, includ ing racism, sexism, 
xeno pho bia, homo pho bia, trans pho bia, 
poverty, ableism and crim in al iz a tion. 
 See also Bios; Bodies Politic; Geopolitics; 
Lampedusa; Neocolonial; War. 
 Christine Quinan
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEGENTROPY 
 ‘Th ought inter feres with the prob ab il ity of 
events, and, in the long run, there fore, with 
entropy’ (Watson 1930: 220–2, cited in 
 Gleick 2011 ). Th e term ‘negen tropy’ is born 
from this very situ ation. It was intro duced 
by Schrödinger to distin guish biolo gical 
systems from phys ical systems, and then 
gener al ized by Léon Brillouin into the 
domain of inform a tion theory. Th e 
perspect ive from which it will be discussed 
here situ ates the term in a certain prob-
lem atic: the central paradigm of empir ical 
exper i ments for science, and how the 
algeb raic encryp tion of quanta in quantum 
physics inter fere with non- prob ab il istic 
prac tices of meas ur ing and count ing in 
this paradigm. It is only by means of 
compu ta tions performed upon cyphers, 
the math em at ical way of artic u lat ing 
 naught ,  nothing , and the equa tional 
manners of balan cing and complet ing by 
involving an encryp ted negat iv ity to all 
count able and meas ur able posit iv ity, that 
prob ab il istic proced ures are applic able: for 
it, the amount total of possible cases that 
are said to happen with prob ab il ist ic ally 
determ in able likeli ness must be ﬁ nite and 
count able. Negentropy, in accord ance with 
this, means negat ive entropy; it quan ti ﬁ es 
and makes count able the symmet rical 
negat ive of what the term entropy quan ti-
ﬁ es and makes count able. And entropy was 
intro duced by Robert Clausius in want of 
‘a word for meas ur ing a quant ity that is 
related to energy, but that is not energy’ 
( Gleick 2011 : Kindle posi tion 4313). 
 Th e problem that triggered postu la-
tions of an inter fer ence between thought 
and this partic u lar quant ity, entropy, must 
be under stood before the back ground of 
the modern assump tion that thought 
cannot aﬀ ect the nature of its object, that it 
only aﬀ ects the subject ive under stand ing 
of this nature. While subjectiv ity depends 
upon will or intent, natural forces are 
working determ in ably and gratu it ously. 
We can formu late the analogue of this situ-
ation in terms of ther mo dy nam ics, insofar 
as the conver sion of heat into energy, or 
energy into work, leaves the amount of 
heat (in this analogy playing the corres-
pond ing role to the nature of thought’s 
object) unaﬀ ected: the total heat in a 
system remains constant, it merely passes 
from a hotter body to a colder one. At the 
same time, the second law of ther mo dy-
nam ics states that we cannot main tain an 
iden tity between heat and energy: ‘No 
matter how much energy a closed system 
contains, when everything is the same 
temper at ure, no work can be done. It is the 
unavail ab il ity of this energy that Clausius 
wanted to measure’ (4323). If heat is 
regarded as the mani fest a tion of energy in 
a system, what is needed is a distinc tion 
between energy that is avail able for work, 
and energy that is not: the total amount of 
heat in a system may be constant, but it 
cannot be trans mit ted (from a warmer to a 
colder body)  without some work being 
executed . Th us, the work done by natural 
forces in the ther mo dy namic setup cannot 
be regarded, aft er all, as ‘gratu it ous’ in the 
same manner as it is in clas sical physics. 
Th ermodynamic processes intro duce a 
certain irre vers ib il ity into how we think of 
the conver sion of energy from one form to 
another – ‘Time ﬂ ows on and never comes 
back’, wrote Léon Brillouin ( 1949 : 93) – 
which in the clas sical formu la tion of 
natural laws does not exist. When the 
modern 
paradigm 
for 
exper i mental 
science builds on the assump tion that 
thought leaves the natural object it tries to 
conceive untouched, we can see now that it 
is exactly this assump tion which appeared 
to break down – if phys ical processes 
involve a certain irre vers ib il ity, then the 
think ing that guides exper i ments plays 
in a manner that cannot so easily be
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
disreg arded ( Brillouin 2013 [1956] : Kindle 
posi tion 
2766). 1 
In 
ther mo dy namic 
processes, energy is not lost, but it dissolves, 
it becomes ‘useless’. Th is is the so- called 
‘expense problem’ related to the irre versi -
b il ity that applies to ther mo dy nam ics: the 
total amount of entropy (unavail ab il ity of 
energy for work) in all phys ical systems 
that can be studied empir ic ally, exper i-
ment ally, neces sar ily seems to increase. 
Th ere is hence a source of disorder that 
applies to systems which ‘seemed strangely 
unphys ical’, that even ‘implied that a part of 
the equa tion must be some thing like 
know ledge, or intel li gence, or judge ment’ 
as James Gleick puts it in his recent study 
 Information: A Th eory, A History, A Flood 
(2011). He contin ues: ‘Dissipated energy is 
energy  we [emphasis added] cannot lay 
hold of and direct at pleas ure, such as the 
confused agit a tion of molecules which we 
call heat’ ( Gleick 2011 : 4355). Heat, it 
began to be clear, cannot be regarded as 
a force nor as a substance; it was not equi-
val ent to energy. In the course of these 
devel op ments, order – as the epitome of 
objectiv ity – acquired a certain amount 
of subjectiv ity; it entailed the eye of an 
observer: ‘It seemed impossible to talk 
about order or disorder without involving 
an agent or an observer – without talking 
about the mind.’ Th e above- used formu la-
tion, ‘neces sar ily seems to increase’, 
expresses the contro ver si al ity of the second 
law as prop erly a law: it is based entirely on 
obser va tion. Its philo soph ical or even 
cosmo lo gical implic a tions, if it indeed is 
a ‘law’, are immense: it intro duces the 
inevit able (however distant) doomed ness 
of all life on earth. Lord Kelvin was not 
the only well- estab lished scient ist who 
began to consider the consequences of 
the Universe’s ‘heat death’, as this doomed-
ness was oft en referred to, for science. 
Resolutions to this problem began to be 
discussed in terms of the possib il ity of a 
peren nial kind of motion that began 
to be linked up with an interest in ‘A 
perfect exper i ment’ as one that is liber ated 
from reas on ing biased by the imper fect 
human faculties and their limit a tions (see 
 Maxwell’s Demon ), and that argu ably still 
haunts todays discourse on Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence. 2 
 Let us jump now to the intro duc tion 
of the negat ive entropy term. Erwin 
Schrödinger intro duced it in  What is Life? 
Mind and Matter  (1944) as a term that 
allows us to expand the ther mo dy namic 
view from physics to biology, and thus also 
to rela tiv ize the implic a tions of the phys-
ical view on the entropic universe. His 
point of depar ture is that animate systems 
are capable of meta bol iz ing – of binding 
and incor por at ing tempor ar ily – a kind of 
energy which he called ‘free’ in the sense of 
‘avail able’, or ‘unbound’. Negentropy came 
to mean for Schrödinger a term that allows 
for quan ti fy ing life (but is not life) similar 
to how, for Clausius, entropy had come to 
mean a term that allows to quantify energy 
(without being energy). What used to be 
the energy- expense problem of work for 
Maxwell turned hence forth into a verit able 
economy in terms of import and export at 
work in the biosphere- world of ther mo dy-
nam ics – organ isms import negen tropy 
(quanta of life), as Schrödinger put it, and 
the more they do so the more they rid 
them selves of entropy (quanta of phys ical 
entropy now conceived as disorder, vis-
à- vis an organ ism’s tempor ary order/
organ iz a tion). Th e biolo gical paradigm 
hence seems to contra dict the second law 
of ther mo dy nam ics, and instead suggests 
that the meta bol isms that make up the 
biosphere were in fact capable of decreas-
ing rather than increas ing the universe’s 
entropy (the amount of work unavail able 
in the ther mo dy namic universe). Th e com-
pet ing paradigms contrast like this: while 
ther mo dy namic physics relates the notion
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEGENTROPY 
of the univer sal to the universe (as, ulti-
mately, one generic nature), biology relates 
univer sal ity to the speciﬁ c natures of life 
forms. Th e phys ic al ist notion of entropy, 
which in physics started out as denot ing 
not  the absence of order  but  the virtual 
pres ence of order in any of its possible vari-
ations , appeared, from the light of how 
biology’s oper a tional term of negat ive 
entropy can quantify life, as the relat ive 
absence of possible vari ations of order, or 
as the relat ive absence of order, or, in short, 
as ‘disorder’. 
 It is this dilem matic impasse between a 
certain monism and its plur al ist coun ter-
point that the intro duc tion of ‘inform a tion’ 
into the think ing about ther mo dy namic 
processes managed to abstract from, and 
to open up. I can only point brieﬂ y here 
to how this convert ing between inform a-
tion and energy works (see  Brillouin 
2013  [1956] for an extens ive and detailed 
discus sion). My core refer ence is the 
quantum 
phys i cist 
Léon 
Brillouin’s 
adoption of Schrödinger’s term of negat ive 
entropy in a manner that adds an 
algebraically quant ized (cryp to graphic; 
see  Equation ) notion of inform a tion to 
this compet i tion (between physics and 
biology). Brillouin conceived of inform a-
tion as a kind of currency that circu lates in 
ener getic expendit ure (the import and 
export between systems), such that ‘all 
these [macro lo gical, quantum phys ical, 
 VB ] unknown quant it ies make it possible 
for the system to take a large variety of 
quant ized struc tures, the so- called Planck’s 
complex ions’. 3 With this, he began to 
postu late inform a tion science as the 
proper domain for quant iz ing how phys-
ical entropy (the virtual pres ence of any- 
order) and biolo gical entropy (the absence 
of order, disorder) relate to one another 
without subject ing one to the other. 
Familiar with Turing’s (1936, 1952), 
Shannon’s ( 1948 ) and Wiener’s ( 1948 ) 
work on a math em at ical notion of inform-
a tion and their dispute with regard to 
whether inform a tion can be meas ured in 
terms of the exper i mental entropy notion 
applied to phys ical systems (Shannon), or 
whether it needs to be accoun ted for in 
Schrödinger’s terms of negen tropy import 
in biolo gical systems, 4 Brillouin fore-
groun ded the role of ‘code’ in such ‘intel li-
gent’ compu ta tion and applied a  double 
notion of negen tropy and entropy – one to 
energy, one to inform a tion, under the 
assump tion that both are linked by code: 
free (entropic) inform a tion to him is the 
maximum amount of  a priori  cases formu-
lated in a code (any ﬁ nite system of ordered 
elements like the Morse code, or the 
Roman alpha bet, the peri odic table in 
Chemistry or the  DNA in molecu lar 
biology); the  a priori  cases can be computed 
by combin at or ics, and in entropic inform-
a tion each of them must be regarded as 
equally likely to be actu al ized. Bound 
(negen tropic) inform a tion is empir ic ally 
meas ured inform a tion (in exper i ments 
with any partic u lar mani fest a tion of such a 
code). Th is inclin a tion in the meas ure ment 
of inform a tion allows for think ing of 
inform a tion as a kind of currency – an 
oper ator capable of estab lish ing general 
equi val ence, equi val ence between obser va-
tion and object – that circu lates in the 
phys ical expendit ure of energy in executed 
work as well as in the economy of import 
and export in a biolo gical system’s meta-
bol ism. ‘We cannot get anything for 
nothing, 
not 
even 
an 
obser va tion’, 
Dennis 
Gabor 
famously 
main tained 
(Dennis Gabor,  MIT Lectures, 1951 cited 
in Brillouin, ibid., posi tion 3805). Th is very 
import ant law is a direct result of our 
general prin ciple of negen tropy of inform-
a tion, Brillouin elab or ates, and ‘[I]t is very 
surpris ing that such a general law escaped 
atten tion until very recently’ (ibid.). Th e 
acquis i tion of inform a tion in meas ure ment
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
not only has a price, it also yields some-
thing: an increase in oper a tional power; 
an idea that lends itself to develop a 
theory of how to quant ize and hence 
quantify in like manner to energy 
(Clausius) and life (Schrödinger) some-
thing like ‘power of abstrac tion’ (see 
 Invariance ). It is this very idea, that inform-
a tion and energy artic u late each other in 
an evol u tion ary dynam ics and in mutu ally 
recip rocal manner, that the assump tion 
of a peren nial motion is no longer needed 
in order to proceed with the exper i mental 
paradigm in science. With Brillouin’s 
quantum- cryp to graph ical 
theory 
of 
inform a tion, inform a tion can be trans-
formed into energy (as elec tric current), 
and the other way around (through study-
ing distri bu tions of heat). 
 See also Artiﬁ cial Intelligence; Architectonic 
Disposition; Invariance; Maxwell’s Demon.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEO/NEW MATERIALISM 
free or avail able energy in Schrödinger’s 
terms), while order as entropy means 
minimal negen tropy (maximal amount 
of free and avail able energy, minimal 
amount of bound energy in Schrödinger’s 
terms). Much confu sion in the under-
stand ing of ‘inform a tion’ arises from this 
still today. Cf.  Gleick 2011 , around posi-
tion 3956, although, it must be observed, 
Gleick does not seem to be aware of the 
implic a tions of the issue at stake. 
 Vera Bühlmann 
 NEO/NEW MATERIALISM  
 Th e ﬁ rst expli cit mention ings of ‘neo- 
mater i al ism’ can be found in the work of 
Rosi Braidotti ( 2000 ) and Manuel DeLanda 
( 1996 ). Th e Italian- born French femin ist 
philo sopher 
Braidotti 
and 
Mexican–
American writer, philo sopher and artist 
DeLanda are both heavily inﬂ u enced by 
the French philo sophy of Gilles Deleuze 
(and Félix Guattari). Th is does not make 
the new mater i al isms a strictly ‘Deleuzean’ 
or ‘Deleuzo-Guattarian’ ﬁ eld of interest 
and schol ar ship. Th e work of Deleuze (and 
Guattari) is not to be followed or copied. 
 What is Philosophy? (Deleuze and Guattari 
[1991] 1994) calls precisely for its readers 
to create concepts in a geophilo soph ical 
sense. Th at is, in a state not of the armchair 
or the ivory tower, or of the agora (the 
market place of human ist ideas), but of an 
envir on mental posi tion. Environmentalism 
tradi tion ally embraces care for the planet 
and for future gener a tions. Th e geophilo-
sophy of  What is Philosophy?  proposes that 
and more, because not only are the earth 
and its inhab it ants aﬃ  rmed but the book is 
also comprised of an aﬃ  rm a tion of the 
past and the future (as yet unknown). Such 
a philo sophy cannot but be research- based 
and inter- and trans dis cip lin ary in nature. 
 So, the new mater i al isms are mainly a 
research meth od o logy for the non- dual-
istic study of the world within, beside and 
among us, the world that precedes, includes 
and exceeds us. Th e eﬀ ects of putting one’s 
schol arly trust in dual isms such as matter–
meaning, body–mind and nature–culture 
are reduct iv iz ing as the envir on ment (of a 
scholar) is never neatly organ ized or clas si-
ﬁ  able. Neo- mater i al ist research ers want to 
know how dual isms emerge, in natural 
envir on ments (from wilder ness to city 
parks), in society at large (polit ics, the 
economy), in art and in media, and in 
activ isms. Just like that, neo- mater i al ist 
research ers want to know, in the tradi tion 
of science and tech no logy studies, how 
conclu sions are drawn. At the end of the 
day ‘conclu sions’ are a dualism of before 
and aft er, whereas life itself is – in the 
terms of the French philo sopher Henri 
Bergson ( [1907] 1998 ) – an unstop pable 
creat ive evol u tion. 
 New mater i al ism is known for its 
dismissively crit ical response to the 
linguistic turn in the human it ies and the 
social sciences. Th is image is, however, 
based on a reduct ive under stand ing of the 
neo- mater i al ist move ment in thought or 
one that leads to mislead ing inter pret a-
tions of new mater i al ist schol ar ship. 
Examples of both the fore go ing state ments 
may serve as an intro duc tion to the new 
mater i al isms and to how they have come 
about. 
 Th e example par excel lence of the new 
mater i al isms  not  having their origin in a 
dismissively crit ical response to the 
linguistic turn is comprised of the work of 
Australian soci olo gist Vicki Kirby. In her 
1997 mono graph,  Telling Flesh: Th e 
Substance of the Corporeal , Kirby devel ops 
a neo- mater i al ist theory of embod ied 
subjectiv ity by closely reading the ambigu-
ous science of the Swiss linguist Ferdinand 
de Saussure. Her 2006 book- length
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
NEO/NEW MATERIALISM
comment ary on Judith Butler devel ops a 
new mater i al ism by zooming in on the 
product ive tensions in the oeuvre of the 
American femin ist and queer philo sopher 
Butler whose work is gener ally seen as the 
keynote 
of 
femin ist 
post mod ern ism. 
Finally, in her 2011 mono graph,  Quantum 
Anthropologies: Life at Large , Kirby initi-
ates a distinct ively Derridean new mater i-
al ism, which can only be a contra dic tion in 
terms if the new mater i al isms are truly and 
canon ic ally anti- linguist icist. Kirby writes 
that ‘if “there is no outside of text”, as (the 
Algeria- born French philo sopher Jacques) 
Derrida suggests, then it is in “the nature of 
Nature” to write, to read and to model’ ( V. 
Kirby 2006 : 84). In other words, Derrida’s 
‘there is no outside of language’ should be 
rewrit ten as: ‘there is no outside of Nature’ 
( Kirby 2011 : 83). 
 Th e new mater i al isms can only be treated 
in a most reduct ive manner when their 
baseline is inter preted as anti- linguist icism. 
A clear example of this train of thought can 
be found in the work of London- based 
Australian femin ist, queer, and anti- racist 
theor ist Sara Ahmed, whose heatedly 
debated article ‘Imaginary Prohibitions: 
Some Preliminary Remarks on the Founding 
Gestures of the “New Materialism”, published 
in 2008, suggests that the work of Kirby’s  US 
colleague, the femin ist science studies 
scholar and theor et ical particle phys i cist 
Karen Barad, invites for a thor ough dismissal 
of the linguistic turn. Ahmed medit ates on 
the opening lines of Barad’s article 
‘Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an 
Understanding of How Matter Comes to 
Matter’, an opening sequence that reads as 
follows: 
  Language has been granted too much 
power. Th e linguistic turn, the semi otic 
turn, the inter pret at ive turn, the cultural 
turn: it seems that at every turn lately 
every ‘thing’ – even mater i al ity – is turned 
into a matter of language or some other 
form of cultural repres ent a tion. Th e 
ubiquit ous puns on ‘matter’ do not, alas, 
mark a rethink ing of the key concepts 
(mater i al ity and signi ﬁ c a tion) and the 
rela tion ship between them. Rather, it 
seems to be symp to matic of the extent to 
which matters of ‘fact’ (so to speak) have 
been replaced with matters of signi ﬁ c a-
tion (no scare quotes here). Language 
matters. 
Discourse 
matters. 
Culture 
matters. Th ere is an import ant sense in 
which the only thing that does not seem 
to matter anymore is matter. 
 Barad 2003 : 801 
 In spite of the argu ment that unfolds in 
Barad’s article (an argu ment about the 
 entan gle ment of matter and meaning ), 
Ahmed reads Barad’s take on the over em-
phasis on language as a dismissal of 
everything linguistic. Ahmed’s eval u ation 
of the work of Barad is not only an exag-
ger ated response (see, e.g., Davis 2009,  van 
der Tuin 2008 ). It has also created schisms 
in femin ist academic communit ies ( Irni 
2013a ). First, in Ahmed’s article itself, a 
schism is created between the new mater i-
al isms and the fore moth ers of femin ist 
science studies: femin ist biolo gists of the 
1970s. Second, the debate spurred by 
Ahmed’s article has gener ated – next to 
responses of Noela Davis, Sari Irni and 
myself – a follow ing of  critics of the new 
mater i al isms: the young cultural theor ist 
Dennis Bruining ( 2013 ), for instance, and 
his academic tutor Nikki Sullivan ( 2012 ). 
A damaging result of all this is the disjunc-
tion between Sullivan’s soma t ech nics – a 
theory of the impossib il ity of separ at ing 
(ques tions of) the body and (ques tions of) 
tech no logy – and the new mater i al isms. It 
is certainly more product ive for the 
academic and soci etal impact of femin ist 
schol ar ship as well as the burgeon ing 
schools of thought of soma t ech nics and 
the new mater i al isms (and the envir on-
mental human it ies and the medical
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEOCOLONIAL 
human it ies and object- oriented onto logy 
and spec u lat ive realism and mater i al ism) 
to cooper ate and share bibli o graph ies, 
public a tions and schol ar ships. 
 See also Posthuman Critical Th eory; 
Ecosophy; Feminist Posthumanities; Mat-
tering; Object- oriented Ontology; Proc-
ess Ontologies; Quantum Anthropology; 
Material Feminisms. 
 Iris van der Tuin  
 NEOCOLONIAL  
 Th e neoco lo nial indic ates condi tions that 
resus cit ate, or re- enact, colo nial dynam ics. 
Th erefore the term ‘neoco lo nial’ is clearly 
connec ted to the notion of post co lo ni al-
ism. But rather than marking the over com-
ing of colo nial domin a tions (through 
decol on iz a tion, inde pend ence and cultural 
autonomy), it indic ates an ongoing persist-
ence of colo nial traces as well as new 
hegemonic form a tions. Th ese are not 
neces sar ily related to territ orial domin a-
tion; rather they are linked to more diﬀ use 
forms of economic, milit ary, ﬁ nan cial, 
envir on mental, cultural and tech no lo gical 
suprem a cies (see  Planetary ). 
 It could be argued that the term ‘post co-
lo ni al ism’ has emerged not only to contest 
past imper ial legacies but also to account 
for current neoco lo nial form a tions, which 
continue modes of imper i al ist actions 
and ideo lo gies in contem por ary global 
contexts ( Huggan 1997 ). Th is implies that 
the colo nial era is not over but also that 
colo nial ‘remains’ ( Stoler 2008 ;  Amin 2010 ; 
 Young 2012 ) have impacted beyond 
civiliza tional terms and are intrinsic to 
the combined and uneven devel op mental 
logic of the modern world system ( Spivak 
1991 ,  1999 ;  Dirlik 1994 ;  Wallerstein 2004 ; 
 Lazarus 2011 ). Th e term ‘neoco lo nial’ 
also dismantles simple centre–peri phery 
divides – north and south, First World and 
Th ird World – re- artic u lat ing power struc-
tures within ﬂ ows and nodes that can be 
either local or global ( Appadurai 1996 ; 
 Castells 2007 ). Neocolonialism obfus cates 
and complic ates clear- cut divides, produ-
cing more oblique and insi di ous struc tures 
of transna tional depend ency. Issues of 
nation, gender, race, ethni city, class, reli-
gion and sexual orient a tions are reor gan-
ized, not only in rela tion to the colo nial but 
also to neolib eral form a tions, in which the 
‘econom iz a tion of everything’ corrodes 
public insti tu tions, social justice and demo-
cracy itself ( Brown 2015 ). 
 Th e issue of capit al ism is central to the 
debates on neoco lo ni al ism (see  Capitalocene 
and Chthulucene ), as the invest ment of 
foreign capital is seen to be used not for the 
purpose of the devel op ment of former 
colon ies, or under developed coun tries, but 
as a new form of domin a tion, control and 
subjec tion. Th e economic and ﬁ nan cial 
power of more advanced coun tries is 
seen as protract ing the impov er ish ment of 
less developed coun tries, or of promot ing 
biased notions of devel op ment and 
progress. Th ere are many instances of 
human it arian 
aid 
( Chouliaraki 
2014 ; 
 Grewal 2014 ), devel op ment inter ven tions 
( Enloe 1989 ) and peace mak ing missions 
( Henry 2015 ) that support the export and 
impos i tion of neoco lo nial models of 
economic growth and polit ical demo cracy, 
and that thwart the eﬃ  c acy of grass roots 
organ iz a tions 
and 
move ments. 
Th is 
contrib utes to a renewed form of control 
and inﬂ u ence under the guise of solid ar ity, 
charity campaigns and human rights activ-
ism, contrib ut ing to a protrac ted repres ent-
a tion of victim hood and back ward ness 
versus the homo gen ous and univer sal 
propos i tion of a common human ity and 
happi ness ( Mohanty 1984 ;  Benhabib 2002 ; 
 Berlant 2011 ).
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 However, the tradi tional align ment 
between the developed world and the 
under developed world has shift ed and new 
powers have emerged, such as the  BRICS 
(Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa), who control new regions of the 
world, at times over lap ping with former 
Western colon ies or the Th ird World but 
also new areas. Th ere is also a ‘new’ neoco-
lo ni al ism going on. For example, China has 
author ized loans to African govern ments in 
exchange for access to natural resources in 
order to support its skyrock et ing economic 
growth. China is now Africa’s largest 
trading partner, but it is not the local 
African econom ies that beneﬁ t from this. 
Th e bene ﬁ ts are for the Chinese enter prises 
that system at ic ally import cheap Chinese 
labour to staﬀ  their construc tion projects, 
oﬀ er ing very little oppor tun ity for devel op-
ment in the African unskilled labour force. 
Th is is a new form of neoco lo ni al ism that 
creates African depend ence upon Chinese 
invest ments without leading to sustain ab il-
ity and devel op ment ( Tiﬀ en 2014 ). 
 Th ese new forms of neoco lo ni al ism 
can involve multina tional corpor a tions 
continu ing to exploit the (natural) resources 
of former colon ies (mater ial resources or 
indi gen ous know- how), or new areas of 
inﬂ u ence, the implic a tions for labour and 
refugee migra tions, the policies of inter na-
tional funding agen cies such as the  IMF 
and World Bank, the outsourcing of labour 
forces, the chain of love in the care sector 
( Parreñas 2003 ), tech no lo gical surveil lance 
and 
envir on mental 
imper i al ism 
(see 
 Anthropocene ). 
 Th e continu ing histor ies of ecolo gical 
imper i al ism, for example, are linked to the 
nagging persist ence of envir on mental 
racism in the context of contem por ary 
climate change. Political and envir on-
mental justice contests neoco lo nial takes by 
suggest ing that new contem por ary envir on-
mental prob lems must be reframed, not 
just in global terms but also in plan et ary 
terms ( Heise 2008 ) requir ing a ‘more inte -
g rated and concep tu ally sens it ive approach 
to envir on mental issues’ than has oft en 
been the case to date (Rose et  al. 2012). 
Environmental disasters are not always 
obvious or visible, or capable of being spec-
tac u lar ized by the media; they can also be 
part of a continu ing, slow viol ence, imper-
cept ible and unmit ig ated, that threatens the 
live li hood of minor it ies and indi gen ous 
groups ( Nixon 2011 ). 
 Equally, neoco lo ni al ism impacts on 
forms of secur it iz a tion in unequal ways, 
using systems of surveil lance and control 
of the ‘other’ (migrant, refugee, alien) as a 
poten tial threat to Western demo cracy and 
there fore monitored through data bases 
(Frontex, 
Eurosur) 
and 
biomet rics 
( Broeders 2009 ) in order to link national 
secur ity to migra tion and inter na tional 
terror ism. Th erefore the digital revolu tion 
did not do away with unequal power rela-
tions, in the name of the demo crat iz a tion 
of inform a tion and access to tech no lo gical 
advance ment. Not only is the ques tion of 
the digital divide a matter of urgency in 
rela tion to issues of use, access and 
literacies ( Graham, Hale and Stephens 
2012 ) but the inter net itself is menu- driven 
accord ing to stand ard ized, default iden tit-
ies, as Nakamura theor izes with her notion 
of cyber types (2002), in a way that recon-
ﬁ rms the struc ture of inequal ity and 
racism online. Furthermore, neoco lo nial 
patterns are present in the way digital 
commu nic a tions are struc tured online, 
which, despite the mantra of parti cip at ory 
culture ( Jenkins 2006 ), exploits free digital 
labour, uses proﬁ les gathered via social 
networks for commer cial and market ing 
aims, and repur poses the inter net for 
capit al istic gains that lead to digital neoco-
lo ni al ism. As Stuart Hall said in an inter-
view, ‘Th e whole inter net, the whole digital 
world, is currently ﬁ nanced by using this
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEOCYBERNETICS 
inform a tion as a commod ity . . . Th is 
inform a tion is oper a tion al iz ing know ledge 
about what the popular is, making it more 
empir ic ally precise, giving it demo graphic 
loca tion, giving it place, situ ation, etc.’ (Hay, 
Hall and Grossberg 2013: 23). 
 While new digital applic a tions consume 
vast amounts of energy and produce  CO 2 
to safe guard digital storage and main ten-
ance, there is also the issue of labour 
outsourcing for the digital assembly lines, 
the role of remote call centres and e- waste, 
the waste disposal of obsol ete tech no lo gies 
in non-Western coun tries (see  Obsolete 
Technologies ) that are harmful and toxic 
because of the metals and chem ic als that, 
once released, lead to long- term illnesses 
and impair ments. Greening the media is 
there fore a plea made by schol ars such as 
Maxwell and Miller in order to unveil the 
envir on mental prac tices and impacts of 
elec tronic media corpor a tions, coun ter ing 
the idea of inform a tion and commu nic a-
tion tech no logy as clean and ecolo gic ally 
benign ( Maxwell and Miller 2012 ). 
 To conclude, even though the term 
‘neoco lo ni al ism’ can become too ﬂ ex ible and 
all- purpose, it still connotes in its essence 
new, unequal distri bu tions of human, ﬁ nan-
cial, envir on mental and cultural resources 
that put coun tries, peoples and subjects into 
posi tions of subal tern ity and protrac ted 
depend ence. 
 See also Anthropocene; Capitalocene and 
Chthulucene; 
Obsolete 
Technologies; 
Planetary. 
 Sandra Ponzanesi 
 NEOCYBERNETICS  
 Developments in cyber net ics and systems 
theory have been prime movers of contem-
por ary posthu man ism. Arriving in the 
mid- twen ti eth century, the metadis cip line 
of cyber net ics gathered physics, math e-
m at ics, biology and engin eer ing into a 
concep tual synthesis freeing research from 
the old Romantic essences of the mech an-
ical and the organic: ‘the oper a tion of the 
living indi vidual and the oper a tion of 
some of the newer commu nic a tion 
machines are precisely paral lel’ ( Wiener 
1950 : 15). Th is is because they may both be 
observed to incor por ate negat ive feed back 
to self- regu late their respect ive oper a tions. 
In its evol u tion to the present moment, 
cyber net ics has also self- incor por ated its 
own feed back, produ cing signi ﬁ c ant philo-
soph ical responses alter ing its original 
tech nos cientiﬁ c premises. Neocybernetics 
denotes this newer line of self- refer en tial 
systems theory and yields a discourse of 
neocy ber netic posthu man ism. 
 Since the 1970s one may distin guish 
between ﬁ rst- order and second- order 
cyber net ics. ‘First- order’ is a back form a tion 
for the original cyber netic logic centred on 
oper a tional circu lar ity in natural and tech-
no lo gical systems (Rosenbleuth, Wiener 
and Bigelow 1943), in which, for instance, 
output eﬀ ects are fed back into causal 
inputs, thus super sed ing a strictly linear 
descrip tion. Nonetheless, ﬁ rst- order cyber-
net ics main tained tradi tional scien ti ﬁ  city in 
its stance of object ive detach ment toward 
the systems it designed and observed. 
‘Second- order’ cyber net ics arose when 
the philo soph ic ally minded cyber net i cist 
Heinz von Foerster forged a ‘cyber net ics of 
cyber net ics’ by turning the logic of oper a-
tional circu lar ity upon itself ( von Foerster 
2003 ). Recursion was now explored in its 
own right as formal self- refer ence in those 
systems capable of rising to cognit ive 
oper a tions, to wit, ‘observing systems’ ( von 
Foerster 1981 ). 
 Living systems came to the fore in this 
descrip tion, followed by social systems. 
Working closely with von Foerster,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Francisco Varela instan ti ated second- order 
cyber net ics in the concept of autopoiesis. 
At its incep tion, the theory of autopoiesis 
provided a formal blue print for biolo gical 
systems’ self- refer en tial main ten ance of 
mater ial 
membranes, 
self- produced 
bound ar ies between internal oper a tion 
and external envir on ment. In an autopoi-
etic system, cognit ive self- refer ence takes 
the form of oper a tional self- produc tion 
main tained by an organ iz a tional closure, 
not of the system  tout court , but of the 
autopoi etic process internal to it. In the 
living 
cell, 
autopoiesis 
 is 
cogni tion 
( Maturana and Varela 1980 ). Sociological 
systems theor ist Niklas Luhmann then 
lift ed autopoiesis out of its biolo gical 
instance for a general theory of self-
 refer en tial self- produ cing systems encom-
passing but also enclos ing psychic and 
social levels of oper a tion. One could now 
 oper a tion ally 
disso ci ate 
the 
separ ate 
autopoieses of conscious ness and commu-
nic a tion ( Luhmann 1995 ;  Clarke 2014 ). 
 Neocybernetics disar tic u lates the spuri-
ous unity and univer sal ity of the human ist 
subject to redis trib ute its virtual multi-
plicity within a worldly nexus inter- 
embedding 
semi- autonom ous 
systems 
and their respect ive envir on ments. Co- 
evol u tion ary 
self- refer en tial 
systems 
construct complex co- depend en cies and 
co- observ ances. Th e diﬀ er ent kinds of 
autopoi etic systems possess oper a tional 
concur rence: living, psychic and social 
systems all exhibit the autopoi etic, self- 
refer en tial and self- produ cing form, but 
without over rid ing oper a tional unity. Each 
kind of auto poi etic system produces only 
its partic u lar mode of cogni tion – life, 
conscious ness or commu nic a tion, as the 
case may be. Luhmann speaks to this oper-
a tional hetero gen eity in the epistem o lo gical 
construct iv ism of neocy ber netic theory: 
‘the tradi tional attri bu tion of cogni tion to 
“man” has been done away with. It is clear 
here, if anywhere, that “construct iv ism” is a 
completely new theory of know ledge, a 
posthu man istic one’ ( Luhmann 2002 : 147). 
 Where the Derridean critique of Western 
meta phys ics observes the priv ileging of 
speech over writing, the neocy ber netic 
critique of dialectics observes the priv-
ileging of phenomen o logy over soci ology, 
prior it iz ing mind over society, conscious-
ness over commu nic a tion. Second- order 
systems theory dissolves phenomen o lo gical 
notions of inter sub jectiv ity because psychic 
systems and social systems cannot merge. 
Nonetheless, they coevolve, either system 
taking the other as its imme di ate and indis-
pens able envir on ment. Luhmann’s conten-
tion that ‘humans cannot commu nic ate’ is 
a delib er ate provoca tion disarm ing high- 
human ist 
presump tions 
of 
subject ive 
prerog at ive with the posthu man ist dictum 
that ‘commu nic a tion constructs itself’ 
( Luhmann 2002 : 176–7). In other words, 
once social systems are observed as consti-
tuted by the recurs ive re- produc tion of 
commu nic at ive events, human beings 
(along with their streams of conscious ness) 
prop erly reside in the envir on ments of 
commu nic a tion systems. To avail them-
selves of those oper a tions, to ‘parti cip ate in 
commu nic a tion’ (ibid.: 169–84), persons 
must couple through mater ial media to 
ahuman, 
supra in di vidual 
systems: 
‘Luhmann’s hand ling of systems theory 
accom plishes just the sort of “conser va tion” 
of the logic of the  gramme that Derrida calls 
for, a conser va tion that is crucial to any 
posthu man ism what so ever’ ( Wolfe 2010 : 8). 
 Neocybernetics immerses the human 
once more into the coupled multi pli cit ies 
of living and non- living systems and their 
envir on ments. Steeped in these seas of 
oper a tional sentience, this welter of 
autopoi etic cogni tions – whether these are 
meta bol ic ally registered or tech nic ally 
inscribed, 
consciously 
imme di ate 
or
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NETWORKED AFFECT 
socially delayed – writing itself emerges as 
the semi osis that perfuses the natural 
world. Communication is re- described 
here as an emer gent evol u tion ary process 
shared out whenever social autopoieses 
chance to happen. As we continue to learn, 
these processes are in no way exclus ive to 
human beings. Th ey occur as not only 
among non- human animals; they also go 
all the way down to the microbes ( Ben-
Jacob et  al. 2004 ). ‘Nearly all our prede-
cessors assumed that humans have some 
immense import ance, either mater ial or 
tran scend ental. We picture human ity as 
one among other micro bial phenom ena’ 
( Margulis and Sagan 1997 : 18–19). Th e 
signa ture gesture of neocy ber netic post-
human ism is to change our prior notions 
about human prior ity by adjust ing worldly 
rela tions between the human and the non- 
human in a manner that honours their co- 
depend ent auto nom ies. 
 See also Extended Cognition; Non-Human 
Agency; Posthumanism; Technicity. 
 Bruce Clarke 
 NETWORKED AFFECT  
 Counter to ration al ized concep tu al iz a tions 
of network media as an issue of inform a-
tion manage ment, retrieval and exchange, 
online commu nic a tions are not merely 
about storing and sharing data but also 
about the spread, attach ment, ampli ﬁ c a-
tion and dissip a tion of aﬀ ect ive intens it ies. 
Network media help to shape and form 
connec tions and discon nec tions between 
diﬀ er ent bodies, both human and non- 
human. Th ese prox im it ies and distances, 
again, may inter mesh and layer with the 
bodily intens it ies of sexual titil la tion, polit-
ical passions or their abstrac tion in the 
creation of monet ary value alike. 
 As the capa city of bodies to aﬀ ect and 
be aﬀ ected by one another (e.g.  Spinoza 
1992 ;  Massumi 2015a ), aﬀ ect cuts across, 
and joins together, bodies human and non- 
human, organic and machine, mater ial and 
concep tual – across bodies of ﬂ esh and 
those of thought ( Deleuze 1988b : 127; 
 Gatens 2000 ). Following Spinoza ( 1992 ), 
bodies and their capa cit ies are constantly 
shaped and modi ﬁ ed in their encoun ters 
with the world and the other bodies inhab-
it ing it. Such encoun ters may then increase 
or dimin ish, aﬃ  rm or under mine their life 
forces and poten tial to act. Th e notion of 
networked aﬀ ect ( Paasonen, Hillis and 
Petit 2015 ) is a means to address these 
inter con nec tions as the circu la tion and 
oscil la tion of intens ity in the frame work 
of online commu nic a tion that involves a 
pleth ora of actors. Th ese include indi vidual 
users, more- or-less emer gent collect ive 
bodies, human and non- human and thus 
also devices, plat forms, applic a tions, inter-
faces, compan ies, ﬁ les and threads. 
 Addressing aﬀ ect as being networked 
results in posi tion ing it as always already 
in- between diﬀ er ent bodies. It is some-
thing that emerges in encoun ters between 
them, that shapes these encoun ters and 
anim ates the bodies involved. Instead of 
being artic u lated as an issue of indi vidual 
capa city or prop erty, aﬀ ect, under stood 
as networked, is that which makes 
things matter and gather atten tion. 
Additionally, it possibly adds to the indi-
vidual sense of live li ness as intens ity that 
rever ber ates with personal embod ied 
histor ies, orient a tions and values (Ahmed 
2004;  Cho 2015 ). Such a framing does 
not situate networked aﬀ ect as either 
visceral gut reac tions speciﬁ c to the 
human or as nonhu man pre- personal 
poten ti al ity. Rather, it allows for an exam-
in a tion of how intens it ies shape our 
ubiquit ous networked exchanges, how 
they circu late, oscil late and become
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
from one state to another. 
 As Jodi Dean ( 2010 ,  2015 ) argues, the 
uses of social media are driven by a search 
for aﬀ ect ive intens ity that orients and 
provokes the interest and curi os ity of users 
as they move across plat forms, click on 
links, share and comment, search ing for a 
shiver of interest, amuse ment, anger or 
disgust. Intensity, or what Dean discusses 
as ‘the drive’, is that which drives the move-
ments across sites and applic a tions. What 
the users encounter on social media plat-
forms, however, are not only other people 
but equally image and video ﬁ les, anim ated 
 GIF s, emojis, comments, algorithms, 
inform a tion archi tec ture and routines of 
data mining. Although their para met ers 
are of human design, these non- human 
factors curate the shapes that our soci ab il-
ity may take, what we can see and in what 
kinds of constel la tions on these plat forms 
– and, perhaps to a degree, how we may 
feel about these inter ac tions. Sarah Kember 
and Joanna Zylinska there fore argue that ‘It 
is not simply the case that “we” – that is, 
autonom ously exist ing humans – live in a 
complex tech no lo gical envir on ment that 
we can manage, control, and use. Rather, 
we are – phys ic ally and onto lo gic ally – part 
of the tech no lo gical envir on ment, and it 
makes no more sense to talk of us using it, 
than it does of it using us’ (2012: 13). 
 Tero Karppi ( 2015 : 225) points out how 
Facebook, the currently domin ant social 
network ing site, aims to cater for ‘happy 
acci dents’ through its algorithms that are set 
to render visible things that users may not 
expect or actively search for. Similarly to the 
‘like’ buttons, such designed serendip ity 
aims at aﬀ ect ive modu la tion, or ampli ﬁ c a-
tion ( Massumi 2015a : 31) in the posit ive 
register. 
Th e 
contro ver sial 
Facebook 
emotional manip u la tion study of 2012, 
conduc ted by a team of psycho lo gists from 
Cornell, encap su lates much of this. Th e 
exper i ment involved the news feeds of 
689,003 Facebook users, and analysis of 
some three million posts consist ing of 122 
million words, without the users’ expli cit 
informed consent (Kramer, Guillory and 
Hancock 2014). Th e research team tweaked 
the algorithms select ing the content visible 
in users’ news feeds and manip u lated them 
to show more or less posit ive or negat ive 
posts. Th e overall aim was to assess how this 
aﬀ ected the users’ emotional states. Th eir 
hypo thesis – and ﬁ nding – was that 
‘emotional states can be trans ferred to others 
via emotional conta gion, leading people to 
exper i ence the same emotions without their 
aware ness’ ( Kramer et al. 2014 : 8788). 
 Without further unpack ing the limit a-
tions or concep tual nuances of this speciﬁ c 
study here, it points to the cent ral ity of 
aﬀ ect ive modu la tion in and for the oper at-
ing prin ciples of much commer cial 
network media – from social network ing 
sites to online news pa pers and click bait. In 
other words, aﬀ ect ive modu la tion is in- 
built in, and central to, the produc tion of 
value as ‘depend ent on a social ised labour 
power organ ised in assemblages of humans 
and machines exceed ing the spaces and 
times desig nated as “work” ’ ( Terranova 
2006 : 28). As forms of aﬀ ect ive labour, this 
value produc tion involves the manip u la-
tion of aﬀ ects, social networks, and forms 
of community alike ( Hardt and Negri 
2000 : 293; also  Coté and Pybus 2007 ). Th is 
is an issue of ‘the corpor eal and intel lec tual 
aspects of the new forms produc tion’ 
where ‘labor engages at once with rational 
intel li gence and with the passions or 
feeling’ ( Hardt 2007 : xi). Not only do social 
media ‘produce and circu late aﬀ ect as a 
binding tech nique’ ( Dean 2015 : 90) to 
attract return ing and loyal users, but aﬀ ect-
ive stick i ness is also intim ately tied to the 
produc tion of monet ary value. 
 Network media involves both personal 
and collect ive aﬀ ect ive econom ies (Ahmed
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NEURONAL AESTHETICS 
2004) linked to memor ies, feel ings, attach-
ments, monet ary value, polit ics, profes-
sions and ﬂ eet ing titil la tions. Explorations 
of networked aﬀ ect as the fuel for action 
help in mapping out how online plat forms, 
exchanges and devices matter, as well as 
that which they aﬀ ect – the purposes they 
are harnessed to and the outcomes that 
they facil it ate. Here, any clear binary 
divides between the rational and the aﬀ ect-
ive, the human and the non- human or the 
user and the instru ment used are guar an-
teed to break down. 
 See also Aﬀ ective Turn; Algorithm; Body 
Without Organs; Post Internet; Non-
Human Agency; Political Aﬀ ect. 
 Susanna Paasonen 
 NEURONAL AESTHETICS  
 At the begin ning of the twen ti eth century 
Santiago Ramón y Cajal’s Nobel Prize- 
winning discov ery of the struc ture of 
neurons as separ ate cells which commu nic-
ate via synaptic connec tions counts as one 
of the found ing moments in neur os cience 
( Ramón y Cajal 1906 ); the 1950s discov ery 
of the  DNA  and molecu lar biology was 
a second step in the estab lish ment of 
modern neur os cience ( Shepherd 2010 ), but 
in the posthu man era know ledge about 
and conscious ness of the brain has taken 
on an entirely new dimen sion. As Rose and 
Abi-Rached have demon strated in their 
book  Neuro , a ‘neur omolec u lar style of 
thought’ has modi ﬁ ed many basic and 
beha vi oural sciences by the preﬁ x ‘neuro-’ 
in 
neuro chem istry, 
neuro path o logy, 
neurophysiology, neuro bi o logy, neuro psy-
cho logy, etc. (2013: 41–3). 
 Jean-Pierre 
Changeux’s 
book 
 Th e 
Neuronal Man , published in France in 
1983, contrib uted in import ant ways to 
bring ing scientiﬁ c know ledge about the 
brain to a larger and more popular audi-
ence. Neuroscientiﬁ c know ledge left  the 
lab and has trav elled into the world and 
into the domain of aesthet ics, a ﬁ eld with 
strong human ist roots. ‘Neuroaesthetics’ 
is not uncon tested but should never the-
less be connec ted to the posthu man. A 
neur onal approach of aesthet ics enfolds a 
double danger of alien a tion. In the ﬁ rst 
place there is a risk of too rigor ous a reduc-
tion ism of aesthetic exper i ence to bundles 
of axons and dend rites, and of forget ting 
an entire human it ies tradi tion of soph ist-
ic ated reﬂ ec tion on aesthet ics (and other 
branches of philo sophy). As Oliver Sacks 
acknow ledges in  Musicophilia , ‘Th ere is 
now an enorm ous and rapidly growing 
body of work on the neur onal under pin-
nings of musical percep tion and imagery 
. . . but there is always a certain danger that 
the simple art of obser va tion may be lost, 
that clin ical descrip tion may become 
perfunc tory. And the rich ness of the 
human context ignored’ (2007: xiii–xiv) 
Moreover, the neur o turn cannot be 
uncoupled from the digital turn, which has 
exten ded the idea of human know ledge 
and exper i ence in signi ﬁ c ant ways beyond 
the borders of the autonom ous subject 
into a networked man- machine sphere. 
Neuronal aesthet ics there fore symp to mat-
ic ally carries the double dangers of, on the 
one hand, reduc tion ism of the human 
exper i ence to the micro bi o logy of our 
neurons, and on the other hand the dissol-
u tion of human agency into compu tated 
networks. But there are also oppor tun it-
ies for multi- layered and networked 
approaches to aesthet ics and exper i ence 
that may oﬀ er insights into import ant 
aspects of the posthu man condi tion as 
embod ied, exten ded and networked forms 
of agency. 
 Th e term ‘neuroaes thet ics’ is of fairly 
recent date and was coined by Samir Zeki
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
( 2002 ;  Chatterjee 2010 ). Neuroaesthetics 
as an emer ging ﬁ eld of interest in neur os-
cience aimed at ﬁ nding the neural basis of 
the creation and percep tion of art works. 
As such it is entirely deﬁ ned by scientiﬁ c 
exper i ments discov er ing laws of beauty 
and aesthetic percep tion in the brain. 
Principles of ampli ﬁ c a tion (peak shift ), 
symmetry, isol a tion, group ing and contrast 
are among the percep tual prin ciples of the 
brain that distin guish normal percep tion 
from aesthet ic ally organ ized percep tion 
( Ramachandran and Hirstein 1999 ). Also 
phenom ena such as abstrac tion (parsi-
mony), synaes thesia and the emotional 
response to art are areas of neur os cientiﬁ c 
invest ig a tion ( Hasson et al. 2008 ;  Changeux 
2012 ). Th ese insights are import ant but 
cannot tell the entire story of art and 
aesthet ics. It has to be said that certainly 
not all neur os cient ists make this claim. 
Following an exper i mental meth od o logy, 
they point out some of the mater ial under-
pin nings of aesthetic exper i ence. However, 
given the over whelm ing emphasis on the 
brain sciences, it is import ant to emphas ize 
that art cannot be reduced to the neuro bi-
o lo gical laws that guide them, and to keep 
in mind that art is also a form of invest ig a-
tion itself. As Alva Noë has argued, art is a 
‘strange tool’, an engage ment with the 
world and our tech no lo gies, and ulti mately 
a way to under stand the way we organ ize 
and re- organ ize ourselves. (2015: xiii). Art 
there fore proposes its own manner of 
invest ig a tion and its own legit im ate source 
of know ledge that goes beyond under-
stand ing the neur onal laws of beauty. 
 Just as import antly, art and culture are 
in constant commu nic a tion with the brain. 
Th e brain is not a ﬁ xed and completely 
genet ic ally determ ined entity. Precisely 
because of the now largely acknow ledged 
plas ti city of the brain, there is a very 
large role for ‘epigen et ics’ determ ined by 
the envir on ment, culture and educa tion 
( Changeux 1983 ). So once neur onal 
aesthet ics is deﬁ ned from these multiple 
perspect ives and multiple discip lines that 
each keep their own method and level of 
invest ig a tion, we can get a more integ ral 
perspect ive on the various levels of mater-
ial and imma ter ial aspects of exper i ence 
that can neither be reduced to the intric-
ate ness of neur onal organ iz a tion nor be 
completely cut away from the mater ial 
condi tions of life. Neuronal aesthet ics in 
that sense would be a new mater i al ist 
approach of aesthet ics that calls for a 
revival of the salons of the early twen ti eth 
century where artists, writers, physiolo-
gists, medics and philo soph ers came 
together to discuss their ﬁ nd ings and 
invest ig a tions into the interi ors of the 
human body, brain and mind, such as the 
Zuckerkandl salons in Vienna around 
1900, recalled by Eric Kandel in his book 
 Th e Age of Insight (2012). 
 Th e second danger connec ted to ‘neur-
onal aesthet ics’ has to do with the close 
connec tion 
between 
the 
brain, 
the 
computer and cyber net ics. Very concretely, 
the rise of contem por ary neur os cience co- 
evolved with the rise of digital tech no lo-
gies that allow visu al iz a tions of the brain 
via non- invas ive scan ning tech niques 
such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
( MRI ) and Computational Tomography 
( CT ). On another level, the co- devel op ment 
of know ledge about the brain and compu-
ta tion has rapidly trans formed into 
networks of human and non- human 
actors which inter rog ate many tradi tional 
assump tions of the autonom ous human 
being. In  My Mother was a Computer 
Katherine Hayles (2015) argues that the 
posthu man has entered the ‘Regime of 
Computation’, whose brain is exten ded in 
a ‘global cogni sphere’: ‘Expanded to 
include not only the Internet but also 
networked and program mable systems 
that feed into it, includ ing wired and
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NOISE 
wire less data ﬂ ows across the elec tro mag-
netic spec trum, the cogni sphere gives a 
name and shape to the glob ally inter con-
nec ted cognit ive systems in which humans 
are increas ingly embed ded’ ( Hayles 2006 : 
161). Humans are no longer the only ones 
that that think; our machines are smarter 
and more cognit ive than ever before. Th ey 
perform many think ing and perceiv ing 
oper a tions for us, and thus the incor por a-
tion of arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence and augmen-
ted intel li gence into our daily lives 
ques tions the clas sical sense of human 
subjectiv ity, 
and 
the 
autonomy 
of 
conscious ness that seem to be absorbed in 
this exten ded cogni sphere. As if the world 
becomes one giant compu tated brain. 
 As Hayles points out, compu ta tion as a 
rela tional process that can run in the brain 
as well as in other media is more than a 
meta phor. Or rather, the compu ta tional 
meta phor is so power ful because if the 
tech no logy for fast networked processing 
did not exist there would be no meta phor. 
And so ‘means and meta phor are dynam ic-
ally inter act ing’ (ibid.: 163). What is 
import ant again is to see that the prevail-
ing know ledge of the brain and the 
computer are suppor ted by data provided 
by the empir ical evid ences of the sciences 
but just as much by cultural and artistic 
models that propose the organ iz a tion and 
re- organ iz a tion 
of 
our 
trans form ing 
condi tions on another level, on the level of 
exper i ence and under stand ing organ ized 
in aesthetic forms (narrat ives, images, 
music, perform ance). Again, we have to 
under stand neur onal aesthet ics as a multi- 
layered, embod ied and embed ded form of 
aesthet ics of the posthu man condi tion as a 
compu tated brain. 
 See also Alienation; Plasticity; Neo/New 
Materialism;  AI (Artiﬁ cial Intelligence). 
 Patricia Pisters 
 NOISE  
 Th e contem por ary under stand ing of noise 
straddles two worlds: on one side is qual it-
at ive sensa tion and subject ive judge ment; 
on the other is the quant it at ive calcu la tion 
of object ive prob ab il it ies. Th e former is 
highly 
context- depend ent 
and 
may 
concern unwanted sound or inform a tion 
extraneous to a certain end; the latter is 
also relat ive to the analytic frame work. 
Th ere are a number of diﬀ er ent quant it a -
t ive concep tions of noise relat ing to 
random ness, 
includ ing 
low- resol u tion 
trans mis sion, inform a tion theor etic and 
psychoacous tic models, the analysis of 
noise into various colours corres pond ing 
to generic spec tral dens it ies in frequency 
distri bu tion, chaos theor etic concep tions 
of nonlin ear ity, perturb a tions below the 
threshold of meas ure ment, stochastic 
reson ance and turbu lence. 
 In 
inform a tion 
theory 
noise 
is 
conceived as the level of inter fer ence in 
the commu nic a tion of a message, or the 
amount of inform a tion avail able at the 
receiver that did not come from the sender. 
Th ough trans mis sion noise cannot be 
entirely elim in ated, Shannon’s innov a tion 
was to show that a certain degree of 
 redund ancy  allows the receiver to discrim-
in ate between inform a tion and noise. Th e 
cyber netic concep tion of noise is deﬁ ned 
as the forces that disrupt the organ iz a-
tional coher ence of the system or hinder 
the attain ment of its goal state. Th e confu-
sion between these various uses of the 
term noise is compoun ded by three diﬀ er-
ent speciﬁ c a tions of the tech nical term 
entropy in ther mo dy nam ics, inform a tion 
theory and cyber net ics. 
 We are thus presen ted with several 
concep tions of, or formu las for, the rela tion 
between noise and inform a tion that are 
highly diver gent. In popular usage, noise is 
deemed mean ing less by choice – its
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
inform a tion content is considered irrel e-
v ant and intrus ive accord ing to personal 
taste. In inform a tion theory, noise is 
described as an inform a tion- rich, observer- 
depend ent inter rup tion of a message, and 
is object ively determ in able accord ing to 
imper sonal criteria; since inform a tion 
theory suspends or brack ets the analysis of 
meaning noise is neither mean ing ful nor 
mean ing less. In cyber net ics, noise is char-
ac ter ized both as an inde term in istic chaos 
that is the oppos ite of inform a tion and 
must be kept at bay through the negen-
tropic main ten ance of order and as inter-
fer ence to inform a tion processing or 
obstruc tion to program execu tion. 
 Any talk of random ness or noise 
presup poses the deﬁ n i tion of an analytic 
context, and a language or means of repres-
ent a tion. Th is follows a negat ive deﬁ n i tion 
of random ness, as what exceeds simu la tion 
or 
formal 
descrip tion 
( Th om 
and 
Chumbley 1983 ). Th e capa city to describe 
noise is relat ive to a certain scale of obser-
va tion; this is partic u larly true for the 
analysis of complex hier arch ic ally organ-
ized systems oper at ing at many scales. 
Noise is thus relat ive to the form of 
analysis; however, it does not follow that it 
is either subject iv ist or ‘rela tional’, as many 
human it ies texts would have it. Space and 
time are also relat ive to a frame of refer-
ence but are nonethe less object ive. For any 
context- speciﬁ c or scale- relat ive  appear-
ance of random ness and noise, there are no 
 a priori limit a tions to its descrip tion or 
scientiﬁ c under stand ing at another scale. 
One might argue, then, that noise exists 
(has an object ive onto lo gical status), but 
 only as an eﬀ ect of inform a tion- processing 
dynam ics and multi- scale complex ity. 
 Noise should also be thought of in the 
temporal dimen sion: recog ni tion and 
predic tion are key to the concep tu al iz a tion 
of noise. Noise is oft en caused by inform a-
tion excess, but can also be the result of 
inform a tion scarcity or an inad equate 
concep tual frame work for model ling. A 
multi- scale, meta- contex tual under stand-
ing of noise is there fore neces sary. Noise 
is a crucial aspect of signal trans mis sion 
systems, by which we mean not just 
language and gesture as we know it, but 
distrib uted 
inform a tion 
processing 
systems mani fest ing at various ecolo gical 
and evol u tion ary scales. 
 A ther mo dy namic system at equi prob-
ab il ity is highly symmet ric, has high 
Boltzmann entropy and can perform no 
work; an equi prob able signal such as white 
noise is also highly symmet ric, with high 
Shannon entropy and high inform a tion 
content, but can convey no message 
( Juarrero 1999 ). Information- processing 
systems, partic u larly complex evolved 
non- linear inform a tion processing systems 
such as humans, must always discrim in ate 
between signal and noise, since they 
cannot evade the neces sity to abstract 
and compress inform a tion. Abstraction 
and approx im a tion are not the deﬁ  cits 
of ration al ity or of the tech nos cientiﬁ c 
instru ment al iz a tion of the envir on ment, 
they are the prin cipal tools of prac tical and 
theor et ical reason. Identifying regu lar it-
ies,  quan ti fy ing prob ab il it ies, exploit ing 
uncer tain ties and account ing for noise 
accord ing to devi ations from expect a-
tion  are all intrinsic features of rational 
cogni tion. 
 If we think of a logical propos i tion as 
the program of a system in the cyber netic 
sense then defeas ors are noise to the 
system. For example, a robot might be 
programmed to destroy all mammals, and 
to recog nize mammals by their warm 
blood. Naked mole rats would be noise to 
such a system since they are mammals but 
not warm- blooded. In complex envir on-
ments, where defeas ors are likely to be 
plen ti ful, stick ing to mono tonic rules of 
deduct ive infer ence is not the best strategy.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NOISE 
Abductive infer ence and heur ist ics oﬀ er 
‘fast and frugal’ solu tions for the navig a-
tion of noisy envir on ments ( Bechtel and 
Richardson 2010 ). Th e extreme eﬀ ect ive-
ness of the non- mono tonic char ac ter of 
abduc tion in cognit ive systems is based 
on the long evol u tion ary devel op ment of 
intel li gence, and its error- toler ance or resi-
li ence to noise is not as yet replic able by 
algorithmic proced ures or arti ﬁ  cial intel li-
gence ( Magnani 2009 ). 
 Noise is gener ally deemed an imped i-
ment to success ful inter pret a tion of data, 
and attempts are made to reduce or cancel 
it. However, it is just as oft en sought out as 
signi ﬁ c ant in its own right. Th is is partic u-
larly evident in science, where the pres ence 
of noise may be an import ant indic a tion of 
the theor et ical incon sist en cies and prac-
tical deﬁ  cien cies of the invest ig a tion or 
proced ure. Th ere is a wide range of 
examples where noise is purpose fully 
incor por ated into the system as a bene ﬁ -
cial eﬀ ect or as a func tional aspect of its 
oper a tion. For example, sens it iv ity to 
signal detec tion can be increased by the 
addi tion of a certain quant ity of noise. 
 Both 
conscious 
and 
uncon scious 
processes are much better equipped for 
noti cing devi ations from the regu lar ity of 
patterns than they are for plot ting all its 
details. If patterns are regu lar it ies that the 
organ ism is habitu ated to, then it is to 
 perturb a tions  of this regu lar ity that its 
atten tion is direc ted, and that its uncon-
scious neuro- compu ta tional mech an isms 
are primed for anomaly detec tion ( Bouwer 
and Honing 2012 ). Th e pattern- governed 
organ ism is primed to react to noise. Th is 
is evident in tests on audit ory pattern 
resol u tion in f MRI scans, showing neur-
onal 
activ a tion 
poten tial 
spikes, 
or 
‘mismatch negat iv ity’ responses, to highly 
complex patterns ( Näätänena 1990 ). 
 Whether a highly compressed descrip-
tion with a high noise ratio is better than a 
less compact descrip tion that is more error 
toler ant is relat ive to the prag matic situ-
ation, and this depends on the speed at 
which pattern recog ni tion is required, the 
risks asso ci ated with failure, and to cognit-
ive resource alloc a tion prob lems in general. 
In eﬀ ect, the sensory exper i ence of biolo-
gical organ isms is a highly evolved mech-
an ism for pattern recog ni tion whose lossy 
compres sion rate allows for a signi ﬁ c ant 
quant ity of noise. Th e payoﬀ  is a reduc tion 
in cognit ive processing cost allow ing for 
rapid response times. 
 Th e concept of noise is related to the 
caus a tion- correl a tion problem in stat ist-
ical prob ab il ity. Variables that are correl-
ated appear as a signal of their causal 
connec tion. When a causal connec tion is 
inferred but the correl a tion is merely 
contin gent then the infer ence is a false 
posit ive: what was taken for signal was, in 
fact, noise. Conversely, correl ated vari ables 
may be taken to be only contin gently 
related and ignored as noise. In such a case, 
if in fact there is a causal connec tion then 
what was under stood as noise was actu ally 
signal; a false negat ive. 
 Th e discrim in a tion between signal and 
noise can be modelled accord ing to the 
Bayesian calib ra tion of a decision criterion 
on a prob ab il ity distri bu tion, known in 
signal detec tion theory as the ‘receiver 
oper at ing char ac ter istic’ ( Proust 2013 ). 
Th e discov ery of patterns in random audit-
ory or visual noise is a phenomenon called 
pareido lia, which is part of a wider class of 
prob ab il ity estim a tion falla cies called 
apophenia (includ ing the gambler’s fallacy, 
over ﬁ t ting of stat ist ics, etc.). 
 Some theor ists have applied the 
concep tion of noise to the analysis of 
complex adapt ive systems such as evol u-
tion ary ecolo gies and ﬁ nan cial markets. 
However, it can be argued that random-
ness is such an intrinsic part of the func-
tional organ iz a tion of such systems that it
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
inter fer ence ( Felin et al. 2014 ). What has 
previ ously been under stood as neural 
noise is likely to be just the entirely func-
tional two- way dynamic projec tion of 
coun ter fac tual possib il it ies, only a portion 
of which are given to phenom enal exper i-
ence ( Metzinger 2004 : 51). It is import ant 
to stress that this is  not noise, but a 
highly canal ized random ness continu ally 
modu lated by bottom- up and top- down 
processes of coordin ated constraint main-
ten ance and propaga tion. 
 Randomness, noise and uncer tainty are 
oft en posed as under min ing reason or 
repres ent a tion. On the contrary, we must 
think of the elab or a tion of the former as 
the outstand ing achieve ment of the latter. 
Reason is not opposed to noise, rather it 
thrives on the discov ery and explan a tion 
of noise, the predic tion and control of 
random processes. Noise is intrinsic to 
cogni tion, to reason, and to the revi sion-
ary- construct ive elab or a tion of freedom. 
 See also  AI (Artiﬁ cial Intelligence); 
Metadata Society; Anonymity. 
 Inigo Wilkins 
 NOMADIC SENSIBILITY  
 Th e endur ing sense of Roma as a people 
spread across territ or ies without historic 
attach ment to any concrete place of origin 
seems almost unique amongst cultural 
collectiv it ies. Th is absence of a point of 
depar ture, in eﬀ ect a diasporic community 
with no strong idea of where the journey 
began, presents a new way of imagin ing 
community that priv ileges social connec-
tion over geographic belong ing – and the 
consist ent, territ orial and thus human ist 
basis it depends on. To explore this idea 
further let us consider one of the endur ing 
symbols of Roma histor ies; that of 
 nomadism . It is not the actu al ity of 
nomadism that is meant here but a  legacy 
of nomadism that I refer to as a  nomadic 
sens ib il ity – a sens ib il ity through which 
Roma main tain an inher ent under stand-
ing of the vagar ies and contin gen cies of life 
on the move. Th is gift  of a nomadic history 
and its endur ing sens it iv ity has been 
passed down through gener a tions to 
today’s Roma, and persists to inform the 
Roma world view – a world view which has 
set Roma groups apart from, and oft en in 
oppos i tion to society at large. 
 Th ere has long been poten tial for the 
Roma cultural model to inform innov at ive 
think ing, but any clear aware ness of this 
has been obscured by pervas ive preju dice. 
As a community that main tains a robust 
sense of self while facil it at ing adapt a tion, 
Roma would seem to present an appeal ing 
propos i tion for nations in ﬂ ux. We know 
the Roma model ( Baker 2013 ) of exist ence 
to have greatly inﬂ u enced the artists and 
thinkers of the avant- garde ( Sell 2013 ). 
Any web search for the term ‘bohemian’  1 
will deliver deﬁ n i tions that conﬂ ate creativ-
ity, uncon ven tion al ity and Gypsiness – here 
art, life style and ethni city are simul tan-
eously combined in a single concept. A 
reminder of the concept of bohemi an ism 
is relev ant today because it gives us a way 
of artic u lat ing and quan ti fy ing the value of 
Roma culture and of its people. It also 
oﬀ ers a counter narrat ive to the ‘Roma 
problem’. thereby perhaps increas ing the 
possib il it ies for Roma eman cip a tion and 
equal ity. 
 During times of polit ical, economic or 
social upheaval the possib il it ies oﬀ ered by 
communit ies perceived to embody alter-
n at ive value systems again become of 
interest to contem por ary thinkers. Th e art 
world is regu larly ﬁ rst to pick up on such 
possib il it ies, but where art leads, society 
oft en follows. Recent art initi at ives have
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NOMADIC SENSIBILITY 
crisis toward the idea of Roma life as valu-
able rather than objec tion able (includ ing 
 Baker and Hlavajova 2013 ). Th is shift  in 
percep tion is long overdue, but the 
conscious attempts by Roma cultural 
actors and support ers 2 to present new 
narrat ives about our community are 
perhaps the begin ning of a re- eval u ation. 
New repres ent a tions of Roma culture 
through artistic prac tice are not only chal-
len ging percep tions of Roma but also ideas 
about the way we all live today. By aiming 
to be  social  rather than socially engaged – 
arising as it does from the mater ial neces-
sit ies of survival founded in the cultural 
urgen cies of the Roma social group – the 
nomadic sens ib il ity recog nizes equal ity 
across the prac tices of life and art; a 
human istic gesture that posi tions us all as 
artists – and equally none of us. 
 A history of nomadism and the collect-
ive exper i ence of life at the edge of state 
control has resul ted in the devel op ment of 
Roma’s innate under stand ing of the value 
of the make shift  and its asso ci ated qual it ies 
of move ment, trans ition, simul tan eity and 
adapt ab il ity; qual it ies that have performed 
an import ant role the devel op ment of the 
Roma aesthetic to produce a set of values 
that are routinely played out through visual 
and sensory markers. Th e reas on ing behind 
Roma’s emphasis on aesthetic modes of 
accul tur a tion becomes clearer when we 
consider the historic absence of a liter ary 
tradi tion within Roma culture; a factor 
which in itself has required the devel op-
ment of a complex visual vocab u lary. 
 Th e prag mat ism inher ent within the 
nomadic sens ib il ity stems from an adapt ab-
il ity and resi li ence learned through shared 
histor ies of move ment and cultural narrat-
ives shaped by life on the outskirts of society. 
Th ese qual it ies have histor ic ally equipped 
Roma with the facil ity to resist the oft en 
inhuman treat ment they received: economic 
and legis lat ive pres sure towards assim il a-
tion and expul sion – although not without 
hard ship and serious instances of oppres-
sion. Th at same pres sure to conform contin-
ues to be with stood through acts of living 
that operate across social, cultural and 
aesthetic bound ar ies to enact and symbol ize 
the creat ive possib il it ies of mobil ity and 
diversity. By product ively chal len ging such 
bound ar ies – precisely by consti tut ing 
them selves across them – Roma recog nize 
the danger of exclu sion at the cost of mean-
ing ful connec tion. Yet that same will ing ness 
to inter rupt estab lished conven tion, whether 
territ orial or aesthetic, that reﬂ ects the 
human istic prin ciple of unity of time and 
space and turn it into a crucial build ing 
block for citizen ship, contrib utes toward 
Roma being cast as a threat to society – a 
deep- seated suspi cion of Roma that contin-
ues to fuel anti-Roma feeling today. 
 Th e nomadic sens ib il ity has by neces-
sity encour aged the integ ra tion of Roma 
artistic prac tice within the social realm. 
Th is co- depend ence of the social and the 
artistic is impli cit within  Roma visu al ity – 
or the collect ive qual it ies embed ded in 
objects and arte facts that origin ate from, 
or circu late within Roma communit ies. 
Th ese include objects made by and/or 
admired by Roma such as tools, textiles, 
décor and other ephem era of every day life. 
Th e shared qual it ies found within these 
objects could also be described as a Roma 
‘style’ which, when exten ded beyond the 
realm of the visual to include wider 
sensory percep tion, forms the found a tions 
of a Roma aesthetic – a visual sens ib il ity 
developed in part as a response to the 
prag matic demands and consequent values 
of Roma life and the prin ciples and urgen-
cies of Roma exper i ence. 
 A pervas ive ambi gu ity is evident 
through out Roma aesthet ics and Roma 
social rela tions. Roma have long existed
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
NON-HUMAN AGENCY
within soci et ies that they continue to remain 
apart from; a para dox ical posi tion whose 
under ly ing condi tions of  contin gency and 
 provi sion al ity char ac ter ize the simul tan eity 
impli cit within a nomadic sens ib il ity. With 
this in mind it becomes appar ent that Roma 
artistic prac tice and Roma life are both 
inves ted in the display and enact ment of 
condi tion al ity – a quality exem pli ﬁ ed by a 
resource ful versat il ity that encour ages the 
concur rent perform ance of multiple posi-
tion ings – and which elicits equi val ent 
outcomes through out each corres pond ing 
milieu, whether artistic or social. Th is 
accord ance of aﬀ ect takes us further towards 
the idea that, in terms of the social agency 
that they distrib ute, Roma aesthet ics and 
Roma exper i ence are mutu ally inﬂ u en tial. 
Th e trans gress ive possib il it ies of the 
nomadic sens ib il ity continue to fuel wide-
spread mistrust of Roma; a mistrust wedded 
to the notion of Roma as unﬁ xed, unrooted, 
and – more signi ﬁ c antly – unac count able. 
Th e very qual it ies which mark Roma as 
suspect, at the same time repres ent a 
compel ling poten tial to chal lenge exist ing 
bound ar ies towards new ways of under-
stand ing ourselves, both Roma and non-
Roma, and our lives together. 
 Having developed in response to life on 
the move, the Roma aesthetic can be seen as 
an expres sion of Roma’s historic nomadic 
sens ib il ity, a sens it iv ity within which art has 
no place, unless as part of lived exper i ence. 
Roma arte facts oft en stim u late the viewer, 
or user, to action. For example orna men ted 
tools, toys, textiles and weapons can gener-
ate feel ings of admir a tion, contem pla tion, 
revul sion or envy, whilst at the same time 
encour aging acts of play, work, comfort or 
viol ence. Consequently the user is given the 
oppor tun ity to perform a variety of roles 
through their inter ac tion with the arte fact. 
Th e result ing phys ical and percep tual 
eﬀ ects gener ated by the dynamic deal ings 
of mater ial, meaning and action are 
common to many Roma arte facts – their 
multiple func tions requir ing multiple 
perform ances in spon tan eous response by 
the user. Such ambi gu ity high lights the 
condi tional char ac ter of the Roma aesthetic 
and the contin gent nature of Roma life; 
states of provi sion al ity that reﬂ ect a 
nomadic sens ib il ity rooted vari ously in 
historic, recent and, in some communit ies, 
current itin er ancy. 
 See also  Art; Expulsions; Occupy (aft er 
Deleuze); Resilience; Terrestrial.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NON-HUMAN AGENCY 
limited notions of subjectiv ity and power, 
or, as Stacy Alaimo right fully acknow-
ledges, ‘within the province of rational – 
and thus exclus ively human – delib er a tion’ 
(2010: 143). Even in the ‘beyond the 
human’ anthro po logy of Eduardo Kohn, 
where it is argued that the subject of ethno-
graphic invest ig a tions must be opened to a 
multi tude of other- than-human beings, 
agency remains expli citly linked to limited 
concep tions of ‘subject hood.’ Kohn expli-
citly claims that ‘selves, not things, qualify 
as agents’; the term ‘selves’ repres ent ing 
Kohn’s attempt to recon ﬁ g ure a multi-
pli city of possib il it ies for subject hood, 
includ ing both vegetal and non- human 
animal life (2013: 92). Th us, Kohn fails to 
recog nize the non- living as any sort of 
possible agent in his ‘beyond the human’ 
ethno graphic account, which is a limit a-
tion that many working in the ﬁ eld of post-
hu man ism seek to over come. 
 In response to these human ist asso ci-
ations, the devel op ment of a profoundly 
expan ded notion of agency that can 
accom mod ate the multiple non- human 
‘actants’ with whom we share and co- 
consti tute our common world 1 has become 
a chief concern among many posthu man-
ist writers. Perhaps most notably, the new 
mater i al ists are attempt ing to artic u late a 
recon ﬁ gured vision of the human located 
within a constant ﬂ ux of mater ial ﬂ ows 
that enable uncer tain becom ings with (and 
within) a lively and agen tial more- than-
human world. For instance, Alaimo 
outlines a theory of ‘trans- corpor eal ity’ 
in which bodies are recon ﬁ gured as 
permeable and porous sites in a state of 
constant rela tion, claim ing that ‘recon sid-
er a tions of mater i al ity . . . must grapple . . . 
with the ques tion of mater ial agency, since 
the evac u ation of agency from nature 
under writes the trans form a tion of the 
world into a passive repos it ory of resources 
for human use’, which of course has had 
devast at ing ecolo gical eﬀ ects (2010: 143). 
Here, Alaimo furthers Donna J. Haraway’s 
argu ment that ‘to be one is always to 
 become with many’. where becom ing 
recasts being as an active and constant 
state of rela tion al ity (2008: 4). Trans- 
corpor eal becom ing could possibly enfold 
a plur al ity of non- human forces and agents 
into an expan ded nature cul ture collect ive 
and give voice to the multi pli city of ‘things’ 
that can and do, in fact, act on their own 
and within their own terms; or, as Jane 
Bennet suggests, may be able to ‘expose a 
wider distri bu tion of agency’ within 
human- nonhu man assemblages (2010: 
122). Similarly, Latour argues that ‘the 
point of living in the epoch of the 
Anthropocene is that all agents share 
the same shape- chan ging destiny, a destiny 
that cannot be followed, docu mented, told, 
and repres en ted by using any of the older 
traits asso ci ated with subjectiv ity or 
objectiv ity’ (2014b: 17). Articulating this 
multiply consti tuted throng of becom ing is 
a prime goal of the posthu man project. 
Recognizing the plur al ity of non- human 
agen cies with which we are in constant 
‘intra- action’, to borrow Karen Barad’s 
term, entails a recon ﬁ g ur a tion of our rela-
tion ship with the world. Barad suggests 
that we must under stand these ‘intra- 
actions’ as ‘ the mutual consti tu tion of 
entangled agen cies ’ (2007: 33, original 
emphasis), in which indi vidual entit ies do 
not exist outside of their rela tion ships, if 
we are ever ‘to come to terms with the stag-
ger ing trans form a tions we are witness ing’ 
in the continu ally emer gent age of the 
Anthropocene ( Braidotti 2013 : 96). 
 As non- human agen cies continue to 
aﬀ ect our current and continu ing modes 
of becom ing, the creation of new and 
vastly more inclus ive ethical frame works 
that can attend to the non- human agents at 
work in collab or a tion with our own human 
activ it ies in bring ing about possible futures
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
NON-HUMAN AGENCY
is (or should be) a prime aim of the post-
hu man ist project. 2 By not recog niz ing the 
lively forces that intra- act in becom ing- 
with(in) our more- than-human world, 
human hubris fuelled notions of human-
kind’s ability to tran scend its ‘natural’ 
limits, control its surround ings and 
conquer the entire mater ial world in the 
name of comfort, tech no logy and progress, 
in reac tion, rather than response, to 
perceived needs or, more accur ately, ﬂ eet-
ing human yearn ings. As the posthu man 
project gathers momentum, this restric ted 
and deﬁ n it ively human ist under stand ing 
of agency must be inter rog ated for its tran-
scend ent procliv it ies, in search of a much 
more mundane, mater ial sense of what it 
means to act or to inter vene and produce 
some times unfore see able eﬀ ects, in a lively 
and agen tial more- than-human network 
of rela tion al ity. 
 As posthu man ist thinkers continue to 
attempt to dethrone, decentre or deter rit-
ori al ize, what Western philo sophy has 
called the autonom ous human, with its 
hubristic and over con ﬁ d ent connota tions 
of excep tion al ism and tran scend ence – 
what has been considered the measure of 
all things, for far too long ( Derrida 2008 : 
135) – the Anthropocene in many respects 
seems to under mine these move ments, by 
reaﬃ   rm ing the central role that human 
activ ity has played in creat ing our current 
and continu ing ecolo gical condi tions. 
Deleuze and Guattari suggest that all 
deter rit ori al iz a tions are always intric ately 
involved in reter rit ori al iz a tions: ‘the two 
becom ings inter link and form relays in a 
circu la tion of intens it ies pushing the 
deter rit ori al iz a tion ever further’ (1987: 
10). Th us, a recog ni tion of non- human 
agen cies as entwined parti cipants in our 
becom ing further allows us to curb our 
tran scend ent inclin a tions. Moreover, what 
the Anthropocene actu ally does, then, is 
call atten tion to the many other agen tial 
forces and beings with which we have 
always already been in constant intra- 
action during our overzeal ous forays into 
the previ ously deemed separ ate ‘natural’ 
world, which we have up until now failed 
to recog nize. It forces us to recon ﬁ g ure 
and ‘reter rit ori al ize’ the human within a 
volat ile mix of agen cies, beings and forces, 
where the human is only one among a 
multi pli city of agents who are active in 
determ in ing and enact ing our (human or 
not) future possib il it ies. 
 As Western human excep tion al ism has 
led to the many agen tial assemblages that 
now plague our troub ling ecolo gical times 
– mani fest ing as super- storms, envir on-
mental decay, toxicity, and mass species 
extinc tions (to name a few) – the umbrella 
term ‘the Anthropocene’ forces us to recon-
sider these massive aﬀ ect ive non- human 
agen cies that we have unleashed, or at the 
very least helped to intensify. With the 
impos ing 
ﬁ gure 
of 
climate 
change, 
constantly surpris ing/shock ing us with its 
diverse embod i ments and aﬀ ects, a rene-
go ti ation of the human’s place in the 
mater ial world is neces sary and demands 
that the agen tial mater i al ity that has always 
played an intric ate role in our becom ing 
with(in) the world be not only acknow-
ledged, but considered on equal onto lo-
gical grounds. Th is rene go ti ation will 
entail a new under stand ing of what it 
means to be agen tial, where agency is 
consider as a collab or at ive action or ‘ an 
enact ment, not some thing someone or 
some thing has ’ ( Barad 2007 : 178). Yet, as 
Barad points out, ‘the acknow ledge ment of 
“nonhu man agency” does not lessen 
human account ab il ity’ (ibid.: 219). Rather, 
this acknow ledge ment should force us to 
become more account able than we ever 
have been before, to the diverse muddle of 
other- than-human agen cies with whom 
we compose our common world. Alaimo 
contends that ‘the inter act ing mater ial
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
NON-HUMAN AGENCY 
no doubt bring about unknown futures’ 
(2010: 563). Yet it seems that these 
unknown futures are already here, and 
seem ingly have been and will be for the 
unfore see able future of the planet (hence 
the 
dawning 
recog ni tion 
of 
the 
Anthropocene). Th ese uncer tain pasts, 
presents and futures, born from the intra- 
activ ity of entangled human and non- 
human agen cies, are constantly becom ing 
anew and chan ging the ways in which we 
become- with them. Th us, the quest to 
recog nize the many other- than-human 
agen cies that intra- act in our becom ing- 
with(in) the world, an import ant aspect of 
the posthu man project, may be a crucial 
step in craft  ing more open and cooper at ive 
approaches for attend ing to our (human or 
not) possible futures, where perhaps all life 
may be able to continue and ﬂ our ish in the 
continu ing age of the Anthropocene. If we 
are to construct new ethical para met ers, 
appro pri ate to our continu ing anthro po-
genic times, for the inter ven tions we seek 
to enact, then non- human agen cies must 
be taken seri ously as the world- build ing 
forces that they also have always already 
been. 
 See 
also 
Anthropocene; 
Critical 
Posthumanism; Posthuman Ethics; Neo/
New 
Materialism; 
Trans- corpor eal ity; 
Naturecultures.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
OBJECT-ORIENTED ONTOLOGY (OOO)
as much as Husserl), it diﬀ ers from each in 
a crucial respect. On the one hand, it 
rejects the clas sical notion that only those 
objects that  persist in space and time are 
true substances (e.g. includ ing tran si ent 
events, math em at ical objects and ﬁ ctional 
char ac ters); on the other, it refuses the 
phenomen o lo gical gesture of redu cing the 
 onto lo gical struc ture of objects to the  inten-
tional struc ture of our conscious ness of 
them (e.g. allow ing that there is more to 
ﬁ ctional objects  qua ﬁ ctional objects than 
 how  we think and talk about them). 
 Prima facie,  OOO ’s pecu li ar ity lies in 
this attempt to combine the  descript ive 
scope  of phenomen o logy with the  spec u lat-
ive depth of meta phys ics. However, there 
are also a number of posit ive claims about 
the nature of objects that unite the diﬀ er-
ent vari ants of  OOO and distin guish them 
from other forms of contem por ary meta-
phys ics with similar concerns. We will 
focus on three core ideas: with drawal, ﬂ at 
onto logy and vicari ous caus a tion, explain-
ing them by return ing to the origins of 
 OOO in the work of Graham Harman, 
and address ing the work of the main  OOO 
theor ists inﬂ u enced by him – Levi Bryant, 
Ian Bogost and Timothy Morton – as it 
becomes relev ant. 
 Harman’s object- oriented philo sophy 
( OOP ) is the original form of  OOO from 
which other vari ants descend.  OOP has 
numer ous inﬂ u ences beyond those already 
mentioned (e.g. Whitehead, Latour, Lingis), 
but it origin ated in Harman’s inter pret a tion 
of Heidegger’s tool- analysis ( Harman 
 OBJECT-ORIENTED ONTOLOGY 
(OOO)  
 What do ‘diamonds, rope, neut rons . . . 
armies, monsters, square circles, and leagues 
of real and ﬁ cti tious armies’ ( Harman 
2010b : 5) and ‘plumb ers, cotton, bonobos, 
 DVD  players and sand stone’ ( Bogost 2012 : 
6) have in common? Th e shallow answer to 
this ques tion is that they all belong to the 
curious mena gerie of  real  and  imagin ary 
things marshalled by object- oriented onto-
logy ( OOO ), but the deeper answer is 
precisely what  OOO aims to discover: what 
can be said of each of these  objects of 
thought and talk, and indeed, of every such 
object, merely in virtue of the fact that it is 
an object? What are objects  qua objects ? 
 OOO is neither the only, nor the ﬁ rst 
philo soph ical approach to concern itself 
with this ques tion. On the one hand, begin-
ning with Aristotle, the meta phys ical tradi-
tion has pursued the study of objects  qua 
indi vidual substances – the basic build ing 
blocks of reality in which acci dents inhere 
(e.g. a man who may at diﬀ er ent times be 
either wise or foolish, running or sleep ing); 
on the other, begin ning with Husserl, the 
phenomen o lo gical tradi tion has pursued 
the study of objects  qua inten tional objects 
– the funda mental units of conscious ness 
through which qual it ies appear (e.g. an 
apple that may at once appear red, shiny, 
and even sweet and juicy). However, 
although  OOO is inﬂ u enced by both clas-
sical meta phys ics (Leibniz as much as 
Aristotle) and phenomen o logy (Heidegger 
 O
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
OBJECT-ORIENTED ONTOLOGY (OOO) 
trend that Meillassoux ( 2008 ) iden ti ﬁ es 
as ‘correl a tion ism’. Correlationism takes 
many forms – from its origins in Kant’s 
tran scend ental ideal ism, to phenomen o-
logy, decon struc tion and social construct-
iv ism – but it is char ac ter ized by the idea 
that the world (and its objects) cannot be 
thought outside of its rela tion to thought 
(and its subjects). Th is results in a prohib i-
tion on spec u la tion concern ing the world 
as it is  in itself , and a reori ent a tion towards 
critique of the condi tions under which the 
world appears  for us (e.g. conscious ness, 
language, culture, etc.). However, the realist 
oppos i tion to correl a tion ism can be framed 
in either epistem o lo gical or meta phys ical 
terms:  epistem o lo gical realism objects to 
its scep ti cism, aiming to demon strate that 
things can be known in them selves, 
whereas  onto lo gical realism  objects to its 
anthro po centrism, aiming to demon strate 
that things can exist in them selves ( Bryant 
2011 : 13–20). 
 Th e thesis that objects  with draw from 
one another has its origin in Harman’s 
initial separ a tion of the sensual and the 
real. It is artic u lated slightly diﬀ er ently 
across the vari ants of  OOO , but we can 
identify two essen tial compon ents: ﬁ rst, 
that every object  exceeds the ways in which 
it is presen ted to other objects; and second, 
that every object is  inde pend ent of every 
other object. Excess consti tutes  OOO ’s 
rejec tion of epistem o lo gical realism, insofar 
as it ensures that there every object has 
hidden depths that can never be grasped by 
knowing subjects. Bryant’s  onti co logy inter-
prets these depths as unac tu al ized poten tial 
– or  virtual proper being ( Bryant 2011 : 87–
134). Bogost’s  alien phenomen o logy inter-
prets them as subject ive inter i or ity – or 
 what it is like to be them ( Bogost 2012 : 
61–84). Th ough these theor ies are distinct, 
they can be seen as enga ging diﬀ er ent 
aspects of Harman’s theory of real qual it ies 
( Wolfendale 2014 : 135–62). By contrast, 
2002 ). Harman ﬁ nds in this phenomen o lo-
gical descrip tion of our encoun ters with 
broken tools a general model of rela tions 
between objects: one object can  rely on 
another (e.g. a person  using a hammer, an 
animal  depend ing on atmo spheric oxygen, 
a bridge  incor por at ing  girders), but it does 
not thereby  exhaust  the under ly ing capa cit-
ies on which it depends (i.e. there is more to 
hammers, oxygen and girders than their 
roles in construc tion, respir a tion and archi-
tec ture), at least insofar as they can  disrupt 
these rela tions (e.g. the hammer break ing, 
the oxygen ignit ing, the girders warping). 
He holds that, if we analyse the moment of 
break down, we can see that what appears to 
us as broken (the tool as  present- at-hand ) is 
some thing other than the executant reality 
we were relying upon (the tool as  ready- to-
hand ). Th is forms the basis of Harman’s 
distinc tion between the  sensual objects we 
encounter in exper i ence and the  real objects 
that hide behind them ( Harman 2010b : 
20–50). Th e major innov a tion under ly ing 
Harman’s subsequent work is the addi tion 
of a further axis of distinc tion between 
objects and qual it ies (e.g. between the man 
and his wisdom, the apple and its redness), 
produ cing a fourfold schema that also 
includes  sensual qual it ies and  real qual it ies . 
Th e rela tions between these four poles then 
consti tute a system of ten categor ies (e.g. 
space, time, essence, eidos) that supply the 
tech nical infra struc ture of Harman’s meta-
phys ics (ibid.: 95–135). 
 Th e emer gence of  OOO out of  OOP 
was largely spurred by Harman’s asso ci-
ation with ‘spec u lat ive realism’ ( SR ), along-
side Quentin Meillassoux, Iain Hamilton 
Grant and Ray Brassier ( Bryant, Srnicek 
and Harman 2011 : 1–18). Th ere are ques-
tions regard ing the extent of the common-
al it ies between these thinkers, and thus the 
supposed unity of  SR ( Brassier 2014a ), but 
the most obvious point of contact is their 
oppos i tion to the pervas ive philo soph ical
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
OBJECT-ORIENTED ONTOLOGY (OOO)
subjects and objects that sets  OOO  apart 
from them. Conversely, the same univer-
sal iz a tion of subjectiv ity creates an aﬃ  n ity 
with panpsych ists, vital ists and new 
mater i al ists not commit ted to onto lo gical 
liber al ism (e.g. Deleuze) or substance 
meta phys ics (e.g. Jane Bennett). However, 
what makes  OOO  unique is its pecu liar 
synthesis of epistem o lo gical and onto lo-
gical humil ity: we can’t know anything in 
itself, but we aren’t special in this regard, 
and so things in them selves can’t know 
each other ( Wolfendale 2014 : 341–74). 
 Finally, the theory of  vicari ous caus a tion 
attempts to recon cile the thesis that objects 
with draw from one another with their 
obvious ability to inter act with and thereby 
change one another, by explain ing how 
their sensual facades  mediate between them 
( Harman 2007 ). Harman does this by 
model ling caus a tion on the delib er ately 
indir ect allu sion to an object provided by 
meta phor (e.g. ‘the cypress is a ﬂ ame’) as 
opposed to the supposedly direct know-
ledge provided by literal descrip tion (e.g. 
‘the cypress is coni fer ous’). He holds that in 
such encoun ters the  allure of the sensual 
object grants us indir ect access to the real 
object, insofar as it enables the latter to 
aﬀ ect us. He thereby proposes a theory 
of indir ect caus a tion under stood in terms 
of the emotional intens ity produced by 
aesthetic exper i ence ( Wolfendale 2014 : 97–
105). Bryant devel ops an altern at ive theory 
based on systems theory and the idea that 
objects  trans late external perturb a tions into 
internal inform a tion (Bryant 2012: 153–
62), but Bogost and Morton each subscribe 
to Harman’s approach. Furthermore, though 
Harman uses his theory to motiv ate the 
claim that aesthet ics is ﬁ rst philo sophy 
( Harman 2007 ), it is Morton who pursues 
this idea furthest, propos ing an expan ded 
aesthetic theory of caus a tion as ‘magic’ 
founded on a rejec tion of the prin ciple of 
non- contra dic tion ( Morton 2013a ). 
Morton’s main contri bu tion is his account 
of  hyper ob jects : highly complex, massively 
distrib uted and extens ively entangled 
phenom ena (e.g. super massive black holes, 
global warming and evol u tion) that mani-
festly tran scend our every day under stand-
ing of things ( Morton 2013b ). Independence 
under writes  OOO ’s defence of onto lo gical 
realism, insofar as it ensures that no object 
is consti tuted by its rela tion to a knowing 
subject. It also forms the basis of  OOO ’s 
revival of substance: prior it iz ing indi vidu-
al ity and discrete ness over rela tion al ity and 
continu ity, in oppos i tion to many strands 
of contem por ary meta phys ics (e.g. actor 
network theory, process philo sophy and 
related new mater i al isms) ( Shaviro 2011 ). 
 Th e commit ment to  ﬂ at onto logy  is also 
inter preted in diﬀ er ent ways, but can 
equally be broken down into two com  -
pon ents: ﬁ rst, the  liberal prin ciple that 
everything that can be taken to exist 
should be taken to exist (e.g. Popeye, the 
East India Company, the empty set); and 
second, the  egal it arian prin ciple that 
everything exists in the same sense, or that 
no objects should be granted special onto-
lo gical status (e.g. no ulti mate cause, no 
funda mental atoms, no abso lute total ity). 
Ontological liber al ism is most emphas ized 
by Bogost ( Bogost 2012 : 11), and is essen-
tially just the concern with descript ive 
scope discussed earlier. Ontological egal it-
ari an ism is most emphas ized by Bryant 
( Bryant 2011 : 279–90), and is respons ible 
for the anti- anthro po centrism behind 
 OOO ’s onto lo gical realism, insofar as the 
posses sion of a unique capa city to know 
other objects is seen as an ille git im ate 
onto lo gical priv ilege. Th ese concerns with 
treat ing  every object equally and every 
object  equally are shared by other contem-
por ary 
meta phys i cians 
(e.g. 
Markus 
Gabriel and Tristan Garcia), but it is the 
conclu sion that rela tions between objects 
should be modelled on those between
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
OBSOLETE TECHNOLOGIES 
classed and gendered schemes of clas si ﬁ c a-
tion. Th e values embed ded in tech no lo gical 
design reﬂ ect exclu sion ary norm at ive 
ideals about such subjectiv ity, and so in this 
entry we develop an account of obsol ete 
tech no lo gies from the perspect ive of femin-
ist science and tech no logy studies in order 
to link the concept of the posthu man with 
the unprob lem at ized and oft en celeb rated 
social death of various tech no lo gies. 
Speciﬁ c arte facts considered fall under 
three broad categor ies: 1) planned obsol es-
cence, e.g. Apple’s hard ware and soft  ware; 
2) celeb rated inven tions that never became 
widely adopted, e.g. Google Glass; and 3) 
mass tech no lo gical fads that quickly died 
out, e.g. the  XO  laptop. In each of these, 
obsol es cence serves as a rupture that opens 
up onto the ideo lo gical substrates of design 
while also inform ing our imagin ar ies of the 
posthu man. 
 Most connec ted to economic rather 
than tech nical constraints, the concept of 
planned obsol es cence became common-
place in modern  US industry through out 
the twen ti eth century, espe cially in the 
postwar years as a means of accel er at ing 
consumer demand ( Cohen 2003 : 293). 
Despite critiques of planned obsol es cence 
that high lighted the arti ﬁ  ci al ity of such 
demand and its attend ant waste ful ness (e.g. 
 Packard 1960 ), both obsol es cence in terms 
of the desirab il ity or cool ness of a product 
as well as obsol es cence in terms of its 
lifespan or func tion al ity continue to be 
used in contem por ary indus trial design of 
consumer goods. One of the more notori-
ous ﬁ rms in this regard is Apple, the 
company at the vanguard of port able tech-
no lo gies that construct and market posthu-
man ism as a mass phenomenon. In order 
to main tain demand levels for its products, 
which satur ate the market, Apple engages 
in planned obsol es cence at the func tional 
level through the rela tion ship between 
hard ware and soft  ware upgrades. Each 
 See also Animism; Neo/New Materialism; 
Posthuman Critical Th eory; Ontological 
Turn; Speculative Posthumanism. 
 Peter Wolfendale 
 OBSOLETE TECHNOLOGIES  
 How and why do tech no lo gies die? Why 
have users come to accept the short lifespan 
of hard ware and soft  ware? Technological 
obsol es cence prompts the ques tion of how 
tech no lo gies, as socio- tech nical assemblages, 
grow less relev ant – a ques tion that becomes 
increas ingly import ant as tech no lo gical life-
cycles seem to speed up accord ing to the 
logics of expo nen tial progress. Moore’s law, 
for example, posits that comput ing power 
doubles roughly every two years, imply ing 
a continual accel er a tion of tech no lo gical 
obsol es cence. But obsol es cence in prac tice 
outstrips such a determ in istic reduc tion, 
espe cially since it is oft en expli citly designed 
into tech no lo gical arte facts as an economic 
imper at ive of accel er ated consump tion. 
 Illustratively, as a result of excess ive 
consump tion, the global quant ity of elec-
tronic waste (e- waste) produced in 2014 
was 41.8 million tons, only 6.5 million of 
which was collec ted by oﬃ   cial take- back 
chan nels in nations across the Global North 
( Baldé et  al. 2015 : 20–5). Th e remain ing 
ﬂ ow of e- waste is processed in informal, 
unsafe and envir on ment ally unpro tec ted 
settings, largely across loca tions in the 
Global South ( LeBel 2012 ). 
 Analyses of planned obsol es cence thus 
oﬀ er a broader critique of consumer society 
that posi tion our desire for the new within 
a series of late capit al ist power dynam ics 
that shape contem por ary subjectiv ity. Th e 
new is deﬁ ned against slower, dumber, 
back ward, dirtier, noisier and/or uncool 
tech no lo gies which oft en reﬂ ect racial ized,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
2006 : 385). Moreover, as a rejoin der to the 
more liber at ory fram ings of posthu man-
ism, espe cially for women, Audrey worked 
to obscure the ways that inter net tech no lo-
gies have covertly piled more work onto 
women’s domestic ‘second shift ’. Gendered 
constraints of devices like Audrey and 
Google Glass show how tech no lo gical 
obsol es cence can emanate from design 
that inﬂ ects posthu man ideals with 
gendered stereo types. 
 Posthuman subjectiv it ies shift  accord-
ing to diﬀ er en tial axes of iden tity, thus 
implic at ing diﬀ er ing modes for tech no lo-
gical obsol es cence. A ﬁ nal key narrat ive 
around obsol es cence of posthu man tech-
no lo gies concerns the neoco lo nial devel op-
 ment paradigm where Western ingenu ity 
promotes itself as the utopian panacea to 
endemic poverty in the Global South. 
Within ten years of its found ing in 2005, 
the One Laptop per Child programme 
evid enced the boom and bust cycle oft en 
attend ant to such utopian devel op ment 
tech no lo gies that usually remain clouded 
in the myth ical discourse of the tech no lo-
gical sublime ( Mosco 2004 ;  LeBel 2012 ). 
Th e 
fanfare 
that 
accom pan ied 
the 
programme’s rollout of easy- to-use, open- 
source, $100  XO laptops to impov er ished 
chil dren in devel op ing contexts in South 
America, Africa and else where became 
progress ively dampened with each success-
ive report showing the ineﬀ ect ive ness of 
the laptop to achieve its goal of dissem in-
at ing digital citizen ship. Th e obsol es cence 
of the  XO laptop high lights the ways that, 
rather than aﬀ ord ing univer sal legit-
imacies, posthu man fantas ies actu ally 
inhabit speciﬁ c ally located socio- tech nical 
assemblages. In the devel op ing regions 
where the  XO was deployed, constraints of 
basic infra struc ture (water and elec tri city), 
tech nical support (soft  ware and hard ware 
upgrades), cultural bias (Western ideals of 
child hood) and educa tional resources 
year’s release of the new iPhone model, for 
example, brings an attend ant soft  ware 
upgrade that tends to render older models 
exceed ingly slow ( Rampell 2013 ). So, in 
addi tion to demand gener ated through 
market ing 
appeals 
to 
cool ness 
and 
increased func tion al ity, Apple’s proﬁ t ab il ity 
bene ﬁ ts from demand gener ated at the 
level of design. Automatically sched uled to 
become trash, iPhone design decisions add 
to the estim ated three million tons of ‘small 
 IT ’ e- waste produced annu ally ( Baldé et al. 
2015 : 24). 
 Th e block buster success of Apple’s 
iPhone marks a contrast from another type 
of obsol es cence: those widely publi cized 
inven tions in posthu man tech no logy that 
never approached wide consumer adop-
tion. Google Glass, for example, has 
remained a niche device, despite the 
posthu man poten tial contained within its 
wear able, augmen ted reality capab il it ies. 
Much of the analysis of Google Glass’s 
failure to reach a main stream audi ence 
beyond the tech- savvy elite centred around 
its noted gender bias. Th is bias is starkly 
mani fes ted in humour blogs devoted to 
‘White Men Wearing Google Glass’ and in 
critiques of the primacy of the (male) gaze 
in its human–machine inter face designed 
by Western white men ( Segan 2013 ). 
Google Glass’s race and gender bias reveals 
how obsol es cence can thus be a func tion 
of design that fails rather than succeeds. 
Many such examples predate Google Glass, 
as is appar ent in a longer tradi tion of 
domestic 
tech no lo gies 
designed 
for 
women by men. Th e ‘Audrey’ personal 
tech no logy device was marketed toward 
busy mothers as a kitchen computer that 
would organ ize family members’ hectic 
sched ules. Designed accord ing to tradi-
tional gender scripts, Audrey worked to 
re- entrench limit ing ideo lo gies about a 
woman’s place in the family’s gendered 
divi sions of labour ( Rodino-Colocino
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
OCCUPY (AFTER DELEUZE) 
Materialism; Neocolonial; Static Glow; 
Wearable Technology; Youth. 
 Tamara Shepherd and Koen Leurs 
 OCCUPY (AFTER DELEUZE)  
 In a short text, published near the end of 
his life, Gilles Deleuze ( 2006 ) pays atten-
tion to ‘occu pa tion’. Th ough it is a concept 
that he used (albeit rarely) through out his 
career, it is in this small text (in which he 
talks of the rela tion between the composer 
Pierre Boulez, the writer Marcel Proust 
and the concept of time) that it becomes 
clear that ‘to occupy’ is actu ally the greatest 
power of art. For it is in occu pa tion that 
great art is able to reveal another world. 
And it is  only great art that holds the capa-
city to realize this ‘wholly other ness’ both 
mater i ally and mentally. Traversing the 
dualist oppos i tions between nature and 
culture, between tech no logy and the earth, 
between human and non- human, between 
the mind and the body, as they have been 
organ iz ing the surfaces upon which we live 
for so long, great art embod ies the creat ive 
power to break through every reality and 
its organ iz a tion of life. 
 In his text, Deleuze talks of the French 
composer (and conductor) Pierre Boulez, 
who had always considered himself very 
much inspired by poets and writers such as 
Michaux, Char and Mallarmé. But his rela-
tion ship to Marcel Proust was of a diﬀ er ent 
kind. To think the special rela tion ship 
between the composer Boulez and the 
author Proust, Deleuze uses occu pa tion in 
the follow ing way: Boulez ‘occu pies’ Proust, 
he claims. Noting how Boulez grasped 
Proust music ally with such appar ent ease 
or tactic, Deleuze concludes: ‘[I]t is as if he 
[Boulez] knew him [Proust] by “heart”, by 
will and by chance’ (2006: 40). More in 
partic u lar, Boulez occu pies Proust in his 
(teacher train ing, school build ings), along-
side those of the tech no lo gic ally determ in-
istic framing for the laptop, rendered its 
actual usage in local contexts remark ably 
complex (Ames 2013). Th e multiple inter-
faces between the tech no lo gical arte fact 
and human subjectiv ity in the case of the 
 XO evid ence how posthu man imagin ar ies 
get complic ated by mater ial prac tices of 
the socio- tech nical that oft en lead to 
obsol es cence rather than satur a tion. 
 To conclude, in all three of its incarn a-
tions reviewed here – planned obsol es-
cence, inven tions that were never widely 
adopted and utopian fads that failed – 
obsol es cence can be posi tioned as a point 
of rupture that both captures the ideo lo-
gical substrates of design and illu min ates 
the contours of posthu man imagin ar ies. 
Bringing a femin ist science and tech no-
logy studies approach to bear on the 
ques tion of obsol es cence inter rog ates its 
inter sec tion with posthu man ism through 
a number of ques tions, includ ing: who are 
the design ers of posthu man tech no lo gies? 
What are the (non- univer sal) values 
designed into such tech no lo gies? How is 
the inter face between devices and users’ 
bodies and agency imagined? Th ese ques-
tions further invoke the perspect ive of 
media archae ology to add a histor ical 
atten tion to the celeb rat ory rhet oric 
around ‘sublime’ new tech no lo gies (e.g. 
 Gitelman 2006 ;  Mosco 2004 ;  Marvin 
1997 ). Accordingly, when spec u lat ing on 
possible inter ven tions into the perpetual 
cycle of newness that ideo lo gic ally colours 
tech no lo gical obsol es cence, one direc tion 
to look is back ward, corres pond ing with 
the Surrealist provoca tion to resus cit ate 
‘the outmoded’ as a way of disrupt ing the 
oﬃ   cial narrat ives of history and suggest ing 
altern at ive futures ( Foster 1993 ). 
 See also  Digital Rubbish; Extinction; 
Feminist 
Posthumanities; 
Neo/New
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
OCCUPY (AFTER DELEUZE)
a world (an entire, extremely diverse and 
unlim ited world) is revealed in the abstrac-
tion, in the compos i tion,  in the occu pa tion 
itself . Th us a great artist is inter ested in 
how music includes the unheard, in how 
paint ing shows us the unseen and how the 
written word reveals to us the unwrit ten. 
Th e great artist is always already beyond 
the subject and the object, beyond any 
human ism, beyond any perspect ive. Th e 
twit ter ing birds from Olivier Messiaen or 
Eric Dolphy, as well as those from Paul 
Klee, have nothing to do with ‘the beauty of 
nature’, with subjectiv ity, and not even with 
one another. Rather, they reveal a world we 
have been  radic ally  blind  and  deaf to, as 
Michel Serres ( 2010 ) put it recently, a 
wholly other nature that we have just never 
‘been in’ before. 
 Secondly, Deleuze’s use of occu pa tion is 
monist,  id est , neces sar ily both mental and 
phys ical. Th e revel a tion of a world is not 
imagin ary or ideal ist, nor involves a 
perverse realism. Th e world given rise to is 
revealed as both a new mater ial assemblage 
and as the idea that belongs to it. Th is 
neces sar ily doubled power of the arts is 
explained by Deleuze in terms of theatre, 
as he concludes: ‘Th eatre is real move ment, 
and it extracts real move ment from all the 
arts it employs. Th is is what we are told: 
this move ment, the essence and the inter i-
or ity of move ment, is  not oppos i tion ,  not 
medi ation , but repe ti tion’ (1990 [1969]: 10, 
italics in original). 
 Th e import ance of art for any kind of 
activ ism, for the well- being of our planet, 
for love, cannot be under es tim ated. We 
should there fore push the argu ment even 
further: the revel a tion of another world is 
written, painted, sculp ted, composed and 
created  exclus ively by and solely within art. 
Th is is what Deleuze means when he 
claims that ‘It is only on the level of art that 
essences are revealed’ (2000 [1976]: 38). 
Deleuze’s inclus ive, or rather  intens ive 
notion of time, Deleuze claims, on the type 
of dura tion that is at work in Proust’s novel 
 A la recher che du temps perdu , and in 
Boulez’s compos i tions. Boulez later referred 
to this dura tion as time ‘in its pure state’ 
( Campbell 2010 : 152). But let us focus on 
this ‘act’ of occu pa tion in general for now. 
How does it work? 
 Two remarks need to be made concern-
ing Deleuze’s emphasis on occupy ing. 
Firstly, to occupy is ‘not connect ive’, as 
Brian Massumi calls it ( 2011 : 21). To 
occupy is not about ‘being connect ive’, not 
about a world possibly coming into an 
exist ence. No artwork needs  any object 
outside of itself (the book, the compos i-
tion) to refer to, nor does it need subjects 
(authors, readers, listen ers) to code and 
decode the world it holds (see also  Deleuze 
and Guattari 1987 [1980] : 23): there is in 
the end  no- thing being occu pied . Or to put 
it in more formal terms: in great works of 
art there is no diﬀ er ence between content 
(for instance a Proustian world) and form 
( la recher che ). Th is – of course – follows 
from the fact that art is  never ‘about’ some-
thing. It is some thing itself, as Samuel 
Beckett said (in  Dearlove 1982 : 123). It is 
itself an event, an occur rence, indeed an 
occu pa tion. Art is not about an object, not 
about a subject. It is a trans versal force that 
‘happens’ to everything. 
 Th us, when occupy ing Proust, an 
artwork is by no means reveal ing the 
beauty of its ‘original’. Knowing it by heart, 
by will and by chance, the genius writers, 
composers and other artists are not inter-
ested in copying anything. When art 
reveals a world this is never about reveal-
ing ‘the beauty of nature’ in the Kantian 
sense. Deleuze concludes that the Kantian 
aesthetic dictum tells us that ‘he who leaves 
the museum to turn towards the beau ties 
of nature deserves respect’ (1984 [1963]: 
56), which is not some thing that our 
analysis could agree with. On the contrary;
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
OCCUPY (AFTER DELEUZE) 
Proust (jeal ousy, memory, etc.), Boulez, 
with great love, feels how all the virtual 
diﬀ er ences had already liber ated them-
selves from the char ac ters involved, giving 
rise to his timely compos i tion. In loving- 
to-read Proust so intensely a trans pos i tion 
takes place that was ‘playing the posit iv ity 
of diﬀ er ence as a speciﬁ c theme of its own’ 
( Braidotti 2006a : 5). Th us the words and all 
the unwords of Proust reson ate into some-
thing wholly other: another world. Th e 
music, with metic u lous preci sion, was 
creat ing- while-liberating a block of dura-
tion, or, a  type  of time, that was always 
already there (in the text). Occupying 
Proust, to Boulez, was about opening up a 
new percep tual ﬁ eld (express ing itself 
music ally) and reveal ing, as Beckett told 
us, the ‘andro gyn ous doubled earth on the 
other side’, making appar ent an unheard 
and an unfore seen  in  Proust  in music. 
 Deleuze uses ‘to occupy’ thus not 
primar ily as a socio- polit ical term but as 
central to what we may call  the creat ive act . 
It signals how art itself, rather than the 
artist/activ ist,  as an event , has the power to 
give form anew. Th e creat ive act never starts 
as a polit ical act or as social engage ment, yet 
it concerns an aﬃ  rm at ive power so strong 
that it always already reveals another polit-
ics, another ecology and another soci ology. 
But ‘to occupy’ does not start as a rational 
act either. Rather, its power sets about creat-
ing or  mater i al iz ing a new envir on ment in 
which objectiv it ies and subjectiv it ies take 
shape. To occupy is then not an activ ity 
which has to start with human activ ity. On 
the contrary: it is creativ ity itself and its 
ability to involve others (and the way these 
others, like humans, allow them selves to be 
involved with it) that mobil izes the true 
revolu tion. In other words: it is not the 
activ ist, the composer or the writer who 
‘occu pies’. It is art that occu pies, that never 
stops releas ing the suppressed (the unheard 
and the unseen) and thus has the power to 
exper i ments with art, are not inter ested 
in identi fy ing the locus (the origin) of 
creativ ity within the artwork (or the artist, 
or the mind of the receiver), but rather 
start from sense, sensa tion and intra- active 
creativ ity. Battling chaos, battling opinion, 
battling the hard clas si ﬁ c a tions that suﬀ o -
c ate our envir on ments, it is the revolt itself 
(the chaos mos as Joyce calls it) that reveals 
essences. Or, as Deleuze puts it: ‘What is an 
essence as revealed in the work of art? It is 
a diﬀ er ence, the abso lute and ulti mate 
Diﬀ erence. Diﬀ erence is what consti tutes 
being, what makes us conceive being. Th at 
is why art, insofar as it mani fests essences, 
is alone capable of giving us what we 
sought in vain from life’ (ibid.: 41). Proust 
contin ues the argu ment by claim ing that 
this abso lute, ulti mate diﬀ er ence is ‘ a qual-
it at ive diﬀ er ence that there is in the way the 
world looks at us, a diﬀ er ence that, if there 
were no such thing as art, would remain 
the eternal secret of each man’ (ibid.). 
 But why the urgency, which is obvi-
ously imposed upon us when Deleuze 
stresses the neces sity to occupy? Why this 
 activ ist need to reveal another, a wholly 
other world, through the arts? Surely 
because there is a neces sity involved. 
Again, two remarks need to be made 
regard ing this. First, contrary to current 
polit ical ideo logy, to occupy is not about 
 critiquing  (or  oppos ing ) that which is being 
occu pied (it is not about re- cogniz ing an 
oppos i tion), but rather about  fully aﬃ  rm-
ing (or  absorb ing ) it. Instead of occupy ing 
‘some thing’ (an outside object) we are now 
asked ‘to be occu pied with some thing’ (the 
revel a tion of a world). It turns a passive, 
subject ing force into an active and creat ive 
one. At the same time the occu pa tion is not 
limited to a pres ence but is equally inter-
ested in those matters that are not there 
(yet). To occupy is then not a response to 
re- pres sion, it is not a re- sist ance. Fully 
absorb ing every rela tional move ment in
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
ONTOLOGICAL TURN, THE
onto logy priv ileges appos i tion and conjunc-
tion over oppos i tion and hier archy. 
 Th e phrase ‘onto lo gical turn’ is most 
famil iar from anthro po logy, where it desig-
nates a discip lin ary move ment away from 
a focus on writing and text- making. Instead 
of explor ing what phenom ena and objects 
repres ent or symbol ize within a given 
cultural system, anthro po lo gical work 
aligned with the onto lo gical turn invest i -
g ates the multi far i ous actions of objects 
and people, the networks that enable agency 
to unfold and for facts to become cogent. 
Bodies (human and animal), plants, weather, 
tools, aﬀ ord ances, imagin ary beings and 
elemental 
mater i al it ies 
might 
all 
be 
considered on the same exist en tial plane, 
equally neces sary to make reality  real . Such 
invest ig a tion does not presup pose progress 
narrat ives or histor ical devel op ment. A 
scientiﬁ c culture intent upon explain ing 
global warming is just as much an alli ance of 
objects and peoples as any other culture in 
human history. Th is refusal to priv ilege 
contem por ary epistemic modes over indi-
gen ous sciences or supposedly outmoded 
histor ical know ledge reson ates profoundly 
with the aims of post co lo nial studies, envir-
on mental justice and crit ical race studies – 
though such discip lines have not as yet 
neces sar ily been well repres en ted. ‘Th e onto-
lo gical turn’ gained wide currency through a 
panel held under that name at the annual 
meeting of the American Anthropological 
Association in 2013, at which the French 
soci olo gist of science Bruno Latour was one 
of the featured speak ers. 
 Latour’s Actor Network Th eory ( ANT ) 
emphas izes non- human agency and insists 
that ‘nature’ and ‘culture’ are not pre- exist ing 
or self- evident real it ies. Both there fore lack 
explan at ory power. An object like a labor at-
ory ﬂ ask enters into multi fold rela tions with 
other entit ies, creat ing through these 
connec tions hybrid or quasi objects that are 
compos ites of human and non- human 
stage another world. Art real izes occu pa tion 
as it  thinks through involve ment. It is the 
archetypal ‘persona ’ that involves the ﬂ ows 
of matter (from paint to the hand of the 
painter) and the network of ideas linked to 
it (from fear to jeal ousy, from subjectiv ity to 
objectiv ity). 
 See also Art; Commons; the; Sensing 
Practices; Critical Posthuman Th eory; 
Posthumanism. 
 Rick Dolphijn 
 ONTOLOGICAL TURN, THE  
 ‘Ontology’ holds a precise meaning in 
philo sophy, desig nat ing a branch of meta-
phys ics that invest ig ates the nature and 
categor ies of being. Within inform a tional 
science, onto logy exam ines formal naming 
prac tices and taxonomy. Th e term’s signi ﬁ -
ca tions are, however, more ﬂ ex ible and 
thereby rather diﬃ   cult to artic u late 
precisely in anthro po logy, gender studies, 
the new mater i al ism, ecocriti cism, queer 
theory and the posthu man it ies (among the 
many over lap ping ﬁ elds that have embraced 
the onto lo gical turn). Ontology oﬀ ers a 
crit ical short hand for invest ig a tion of the 
char ac ter ist ics of being, with the impli cit 
notion that lively traits may be found equally 
in humans and non- humans. Oft en 
deployed as a ﬂ at ten ing device, onto logy 
may open the door to posthu man ism 
by refus ing anthro po centric schemes for 
order ing the universe. Flint pebbles, matsu-
take mush rooms, elder berry shrubs, barn 
owls, global corpor a tions like Disney and 
stories all possess distinct onto lo gies, and 
are all there fore equally worthy of study, 
espe cially through the assemblages they 
form to act in the world. Catalogues like the 
one I just formu lated oft en struc ture onto-
lo gical rumin a tion in the human it ies, where
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ONTOLOGICAL TURN, THE 
not recal cit rant, for to describe it thus is 
only to narrate the world anthro po centric-
ally. All mater i al ity is inher ently lively, 
exert ing agency regard less of human alli-
ance or inten tion. Th is omni present but 
oft en unob served vital ity invites a dis -
an thro po centric ecology and a more com-
plic ated worl ded ness, one in which matter 
cannot be reduced to resource. Even more 
than 
Latour 
and 
Harman, 
Bennett 
describes a world enchanted by the viva-
city of its non- humans, a dance of bodies 
and objects that requires an ethics of 
wonder and cautious regard. 
 If the onto lo gical turn has a down side, it 
is that import ant human diﬀ er ences (espe-
cially race and gender) tend to vanish from 
atten tion. When things are examined as 
they exist for them selves, within secret 
solitudes, they can seem to exist beyond 
femin ism, crit ical race studies, envir on-
mental justice, history. No man is an island, 
but aft er the onto lo gical turn every object 
might be. Perhaps such isol a tion is the 
neces sary 
consequence 
of 
move ment 
beyond crit ical anthro po centri cism. Yet 
with drawal into mystery extracts objects 
from the urgent human stories in which 
they parti cip ate as props and actors. Object- 
oriented onto logy, for example, is not about 
gender (too anthro po centric), yet as a mode 
of inquiry is oft en quietly gendered by the 
objects of its inquiry: tools, espe cially 
hammers; consumer products, espe cially 
elec tron ics (toast ers, cars, computers); and 
phenom ena that are really big, like icebergs, 
plutonium distri bu tion and the ozone layer. 
Room certainly exists for queer ecolo gies: 
Timothy Morton composed an essen tial 
essay with just that title (2010a). Objects are 
active in the making of gender and race, 
albeit unre li ably, and that produc tion is en-
abled through human–non- human alli ance, 
through networks that inter mix onto lo gical 
distinc tions. To ensure that the onto lo gical 
turn does not turn away from human 
elements (onto logy becomes distrib uted 
and shared). Objects are best under stood in 
action, where their agency becomes palp-
able. A rock palmed along the shore is a 
parti cipant in an ines tim able history of 
subter ranean forces, prim or dial volca noes, 
the cease less rhythm of waves, ﬂ eet ing use 
as a gull’s hammer or warrior’s arrow head. 
An object is nothing more than the alli-
ances it can support, defeat, foster or resist 
– and like any actant cannot be reduced to a 
play of deeper struc tures, espe cially not 
linguistic ones (language too oft en gets 
dismissed as imma ter ial; it is not).  ANT is a 
move ment- based, detail- oriented analyt ical 
mode that proceeds slowly, tracing the 
tangle of threads that form the networks 
connect ing things to each other. 
 If  ANT has a down side, it is a tend ency 
to think of objects as being wholly absorbed 
into the networks in which they parti cip ate. 
Th ey give them selves over completely, 
holding nothing back. Th e philo sopher 
Graham Harman argues that no two objects 
can really touch each other (all touch is 
medi ated), and that objects with hold a part 
of them selves from every rela tion (we can 
never know an object in its entirety). Th is 
approach is oft en called spec u lat ive realism, 
and in Harman’s case more speciﬁ c ally 
 Object-Oriented Ontology (OOO) . Th e 
partic u lar ity of objects is emphas ized by 
Harman, so there is little room for 
taxonomy. Stone enters into rela tions as  a 
stone – that is, as a partic u lar pebble or 
boulder, a singu lar entity rather than a 
plural and generic substance.  OOO grants 
objects their strange autonomy. Th ey will 
always evade full appre hen sion, will always 
hold in their depths inex haust ible mystery. 
 Jane Bennett’s vibrant mater i al ism 
shares much with  ANT and  OOO , but her 
work embeds an onto logy of the non- 
human within ethics and polit ics, giving it 
an activ ism the others lack. In Bennett’s 
account a rock or simil arly dense object is
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
advice of their minders, assum ing the pulse 
of the masses can be aggreg ated and calib-
rated back into policy- making. Oversight 
of this cyber netic machine is also pursued 
by human it ies and social science research-
ers inves ted in digital methods that index 
the inputs of civil society in parti cip at ory 
mode. Against this mana gerial model of 
governance and know ledge produc tion, 
the ques tion of corres pond ence between 
data and the world of objects and things 
remains elusive as long as schemas of intel-
li gib il ity command insti tu tional, epistem o-
lo gical and polit ical hege mony. 
 Th e fantasy of govern ment through 
cyber net ics was trialled at the proto type 
level in Staﬀ ord Beer’s exper i ments in 
data- driven social ism in Allende’s Chile in 
the 1970s (see  Medina 2011 ). Such a model 
was revived in recent years with the 
attempt by the P2P Foundation, along with 
fellow trav el lers such as Bernard Stiegler’s 
L’Institut de recher che et d’innovation 
( IRI ), to install peer- to-peer models of 
socio- economic produc tion and educa tion 
in Ecuador. Th e attempt to imple ment a 
counter- hege monic system in this instance 
failed primar ily because of a struggle to 
ﬁ nd a common language. Th is is not a 
problem of what Naoki Sakai terms ‘homo-
lin gual trans la tion’ so much as a problem 
of making a concept quant it at ively jump 
into the form of a meme that penet rates 
and infects insti tu tional mental it ies. 1 
 As much as the free soft  ware and creat-
ive commons move ments hit the main-
stream they have para dox ic ally remained 
in the margins of the power of the stacks, 
other wise known as plat form capit al ism. 
In earlier times there was either the main-
stream or the margin. You could exist in 
one but not both. Within a near univer sal 
condi tion of a main stream without 
margins, the capa city to devise and unleash 
the power of critique is consigned to the 
 trauer spiel  of modern ity. Immanence 
diﬀ er ence, it is import ant to acknow l -
edge that the turn to onto logy builds upon a 
mater ial turn of long dura tion, which itself 
has been an endur ing femin ist enter prise. 
 Th e new mater i al ism is a femin ist mode 
of inquiry that emphas izes not gulfs and 
separ a tions but permeab il ity and inter -
 pen et ra tion, elemental intimacies over with-
drawn mystery, what Stacy Alaimo has 
called  trans- corpor eal ity . Like Bennett’s 
vibrant mater i al ism, the new mater i al ism 
reson ates profoundly with non- modern 
modes of appre hend ing the agency of 
matter and objects, as well as the entan gle-
ment of bodies, matter and things within 
their gener at ive envir on ments. Some of 
the richest work in the new mater i al ism 
has been conduc ted under what Serenella 
Iovino and Serpil Oppermann call mater-
ial ecocriti cism, examin ing how all matter 
is storied, full of narrat ives that may or 
may not involve the human, but that do 
not leave human partic u lar ity behind. 
 Th e onto lo gical turn is, admit tedly, a 
rather nebu lous term – and perhaps its 
strength lies in its vague ness. With its 
emphasis on a non- human-centred cosmos, 
however, this turn (or veering) oﬀ ers an 
essen tial cata lyst to posthu man environs. 
 See 
also 
Commutation 
Ontology; 
Ecomaterialism; Econtology; In/human; 
Mattering; Material Feminisms; Posthuman 
Ethics; Object-Oriented Ontology. 
 Jeﬀ rey Jerome Cohen 
 ORGANIZATION IN PLATFORM 
CAPITALISM  
 In an age of algorithmic governance and 
pre- emptive action, the prevail ing schem-
atic of polit ics is orches trated around data 
analyt ics of social media. Politicians grav it-
ate toward Facebook and Twitter on the
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ORGANIZATION IN PLATFORM CAPITALISM 
redis tri bu tion of wealth and resources, the 
ques tion of organ iz a tion without sover-
eignty remains to be addressed. 
 Organization aimed at clutch ing power 
from above will do nothing in terms of 
forging a global grammar able to design 
concepts that critique and direct debates 
on issues and condi tions in order to regain 
the initi at ive. Cognitive capit al ism obtains 
power, in part, because of its binding capa-
city (see  Moulier Boutang 2011 ). It is able 
to distrib ute and imple ment a coher ent 
message across a vast range of insti tu tional 
and organ iz a tional settings. In other words, 
cognit ive capit al ism holds an elect ive aﬃ  n-
ity with tech no lo gies of medi ation. Rituals 
of organ iz a tion are required to galvan ize 
social ity in coher ent rather than perpetu-
ally dispersed forms and prac tice. 
 Where are the forms of organ iz a tion that 
regen er ate the collect ive conﬁ d ence that 
typi ﬁ ed the histor ical avant- garde? Can new 
modes of organ iz a tion func tion in a cent ri-
fu gal manner to escape the sectari an ism 
of the group dynamic? A decade ago we 
proposed the concept of organ ized networks 
as a new insti tu tional form in response to 
the ‘walled gardens’ of social media. We 
fore groun ded the need for a stra tegic turn 
that could address the problem of sustain-
ab il ity of social organ iz a tion. Neighbouring 
concepts such as ‘plat form cooper ativ ism’ 
and the many exper i ments in social centres 
and educa tional infra struc tures such as 
‘free thought’ are strong examples of how the 
work of inven tion is mani fest ing as new 
organ iz a tional forms. 2  
 A distrib uted labor at ory of thought is 
needed that fuses intel lec tual and polit ical 
inven tion without the clien tel ism of the 
think- tank model. A praxis that dispenses 
with the misguided senti ment of post- 
capit al ist econom ies and all the priv ilege 
that entails. Th e format of this gloss ary itself 
without an outside is submission with 
occasional resistance whose only eﬀ ect is 
to supply data- driven capit al ism with a 
surplus of records and related meta tags. 
 For all the attempts to estab lish a crit-
ical mass for altern at ive prac tices in the 
age of the Anthropocene, which mani fest 
as networks of organic food suppli ers, 
hipster maker econom ies, co- working 
spaces, urban garden ing and renew able 
ener gies, there remains a depend ency on 
main stream archi tec tures from global 
logist ics to data centres and the perpetu-
ation of an inter na tional divi sion of labour. 
Th ere is no visible prospect of these core 
plan et ary systems being over hauled or 
replaced. Despite the prolif er a tion of these 
sort of altern at ive prac tices, the decline in 
global working stand ards and employ ment 
oppor tun it ies is insep ar able from the 
penet rat ive force of ﬁ nan cial capit al ism. 
 However much the possib il ity of think-
ing the Hegelian total ity remains as a 
utopian posi tion from which to over come 
the frag ment a tion and dissip a tion of 
mater ial life caused by iden tit arian polit ics, 
the digital archi tec tures that oper a tion al ize 
the world increas ingly with draw from the 
grasp of the human. Even those such as 
Yanis Varoufakis, who have glimpsed the 
inner work ings of the tech no cratic elite, 
are unable to mani fest propos als for a 
move ment of the disaﬀ ected. Th e network 
imagin ary cannot on its own perform the 
work of imple ment a tion. Why? Because 
the stacks reign supreme. 
 Th e consol id a tion of resig na tion is one 
option. Th e ongoing agenda of the Mont 
Pèlerin Society is another. Th e regional 
geopol it ical giants in Putin’s Russia or the 
Beijing Consensus may, for all we know, 
deliver the path to restor a tion for a global 
future able to with stand the ravages of capit-
al ism in ways not reliant on Silicon Valley’s 
engin eer ing logic of techno- solu tion ism. 
But unless we wish to commit to a pater nal-
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 2. See  Trebor Scholz, 2014 , and the related 
event, ‘Platform Cooperativism: Th e 
Internet, Ownership, Democracy’, Th e 
New School, New York, 13–14 November 
2015,  http://plat form coop.net/ . See also 
 free thought , ‘a collect ive formed in 2011 
by Irit Rogoﬀ , Stefano Harney, Adrian 
Heathﬁ eld, Massimiliano Mollona, Louis 
Moreno and Nora Sternfeld’,  http://
free thought- infra struc ture.org/ 
[both 
accessed 19 April 2017]. 
 Geert Lovink and Ned Rossiter  
 OTHERWISE EMBODIED OTHERS  
 Detail of Pierre Huyghe’s  Untilled (2011–
12) at d OCUMENTA 13, an install a tion 
is part of the cata loguing of concepts, prob-
lems and condi tions that exper i ment with 
the organ iz a tion of thought not consigned 
to the aﬃ  rm a tion of the tran scend ent. How 
to unleash concepts that organ ize total ity as 
a distrib uted archi tec ture is key to the form-
a tion of autonom ous infra struc tures able to 
with stand the mono poly on decision gift ed 
to algorithmic capit al ism. 
 See also  Algorithm; Algorithmic Studies; 
Commons, the; Digital Citizenship; P2P 
(Peer to Peer) Economies; Gulf Labor; 
Metadata Society; Hypersocial.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
OTHERWISE EMBODIED OTHERS 
reclin ing nude, in the middle of a muddy 
clear ing. A staged perform ance, of which 
its actors’ count less inter ac tions over the 
course of three months couldn’t have 
been composed, nor registered by human 
eyes. 
 See also Animism (Limulus); Body Without 
Organs; Forests; Multispecies; Postglacial; 
Multiverse. 
 Pierre Huyghe 
within the compost ing site of Kassel’s 
Karlsaue Park. Various entit ies – many of 
them living – formed a biotope, one of the 
most 
remark able 
inhab it ants 
being 
Huyghe’s pink- legged dog called Human. 
Amidst masses of soil, piles of bricks 
and broken pieces of asphalt, she shared 
habitat with at least two puppies, stacks of 
concrete slabs and muddy pools around 
and from which various psycho tropic 
plants grew and multi plied, their pollen 
trans ferred by bees whose large hive
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
P2P (PEER TO PEER) ECONOMIES
Global South, they are every where under 
stress of further enclos ures and other pres-
sures that endanger their vital ity. 
 With the emer gence of the inter net and 
the Web, a new sphere of commons has 
been gaining ground in economic devel op-
ment in the form of peer to peer econom ies. 
Th is new form includes a shared resource 
produced by and for user communit ies and 
governed by these communit ies. It has a 
distinct feature, which is its ‘abund ant’ 
nature. Th is abund ance is the result of the 
near zero marginal cost of its repro duc tion, 
once a ﬁ rst copy has been produced. Th us, 
the user community of a digital commons is 
non- territ orial and can in theory reach a 
univer sally distrib uted status, only limited 
by the lack of connectiv ity, language, user 
skills or interest, of its poten tially global 
user community. Such digital commons 
have taken the form of know ledge commons, 
for example the free encyc lo pe dia Wikipedia, 
or the myriad of free and open- source soft -
ware projects. Moreover, through global 
open design communit ies, digital commons 
can be linked to distrib uted manu fac-
tur ing that expands the domain of shared, 
common produc tion, as is the case with the 
Wikispeed open- source car, or with the 
WikiHouse open plat form for sustain able 
build ing and construc tion. 
 Yochai Benkler ( 2006 ) coined the term 
‘commons- based peer produc tion’ to 
describe a new model of economic produc-
tion, diﬀ er ent from both markets and 
ﬁ rms. In commons- based peer produc tion, 
the creat ive energy of autonom ous 
 P2P (PEER TO PEER) 
ECONOMIES  
 Th e notion of ‘commons’ has been deﬁ ned 
in a mani fold manner: ﬁ rst, as a combin a-
tion of a shared resource where each 
stake holder has an equal interest, i.e. the 
commons as an object; then as a commu-
nity that main tains or co- creates it, i.e. the 
activ ity of common ing; and also as the 
commonly created model of governance 
( Bollier 2009 , 2014). Th e commons sphere 
entails human and non- human actors and 
can include natural gift s such as air, water, 
the oceans and wild life, and shared assets 
or creat ive work like the inter net, the 
airwaves, the languages, our cultural herit-
age and public know ledge which have 
been accu mu lat ing since time imme-
morial ( Bollier 2009 ). Th e envir on mental 
or natural commons, extens ively studied 
by Elinor Ostrom ( 1990 ), has gener ally 
been part of the economic life since pre- 
capit al ist era, by provid ing vital resources 
for the major ity of human and non- human 
popu la tions. However, modern economic 
systems, like capit al ism or state social ism, 
have oft en enclosed the commons. While 
capit al ism has gener ally attemp ted to 
commodify the commons, state social ism 
has frequently turned them into state-
public prop erty. Nevertheless, in both cases 
the enclos ures of the commons were meant 
to bring these resources into the orbit of 
the domin ant economy and its model of 
accu mu la tion of surplus value. While many 
tradi tional commons survive, mainly in the 
 P
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
P2P (PEER TO PEER) ECONOMIES 
peers in a network. Hence, Uber monet izes 
ride- hailing without produ cing cars, or 
Airbnb monet izes rentals without produ-
cing phys ical assets for hospit al ity. 
 Th is extern al iz a tion of produc tion costs 
is one of the factors in their compet it ive-
ness vis-à- vis tradi tional players, such as 
taxis and hotels, which are not able to 
extern al ize such costs and are also subject 
to more strin gent regu la tions due to their 
intens ive use of salar ied labour. Th e 
extract ive nature of these busi ness models 
makes the commons economy prob lem atic 
under the domin ance of capit al ist econom-
ics. Making use of the partic u lar entan gle-
ment of tech no lo gies involved in the digital 
commons with forms of inter ac tion, such 
cases of netarch ical capit al ism – or for 
instance the so- called ‘sharing economy’ – 
ﬁ nd new contours in the enclos ure of 
activ it ies of cooper a tion, sharing and 
inform al ity previ ously considered outside 
of capit al ism. Th us the sharing economy 
may be said to create a ‘value crisis’ 
( Bauwens and Niaros 2016 ). Th e value 
crisis can be deﬁ ned as a process whereby 
global user communit ies are increas ingly 
able to produce use value through mutual 
co- ordin a tion in networks, poten tially 
growing in an expo nen tial manner, while 
the monet iz a tion only grows more slowly 
and linearly at the margins, and is captured 
almost exclus ively by the owners of private 
plat forms. Th is form of the sharing economy 
can only create a crisis of increas ing precar-
ity, and could be inter preted as a form of 
hyper- neolib er al ism, relying increas ingly 
on free or increas ingly cheaper precari ous 
labour. 
 At the same time, we are observing 
the emer gence of altern at ives, marked by 
gener at ive busi ness models instead of 
extract ive ones. To under stand their logic, 
it might be useful to look at the insti tu-
tional struc ture of the economy of the 
indi vidu als is organ ized in decent ral ized, 
peer- to-peer networks. It is co- ordin ated 
into mean ing ful projects, largely without 
tradi tional hier arch ical organ iz a tion or, 
oft en, ﬁ nan cial compens a tion ( Benkler 
2006 ). In addi tion to this, Jeremy Rifk in 
( 2014 ) has argued that such abund ant 
commons will not limit them selves to 
digital commons, but will also emerge in 
phys ical econom ies; for instance, in the 
ﬁ eld of renew able energy or even in generic 
phys ical produc tion, through the com-
bina tion of desktop manu fac tur ing/digital 
fabric a tion tech no lo gies and renew able/
biode grad able mater ial resources. 
 Arguably, the emer gence of these digit-
ally produced commons also creates an 
import ant change in capit al ism itself. 
Michel Bauwens ( 2012 ) has deﬁ ned this 
new form of capit al ism as netarch ical 
capit al ism, with ‘netarchy’ meaning the 
hier archy of the network. Netarchical 
capit al ism could be said to come in two (or 
more) comple ment ary forms. First, in the 
commons economy where commons are 
actu ally produced at the heart of the busi-
ness model. In this case, netarch ical ﬁ rms 
create busi ness models by devel op ing 
added services around the commons, 
which are produced by the user communit-
ies. Firms reap the bene ﬁ ts of the human 
cooper a tion at the heart of commons 
produc tion, and get the beneﬁ t not just of 
their own invest ment, but also of the 
invest ments of the whole entre pren eur ial 
coali tion which has inves ted in the same 
commons, and of the substan tial amount 
of free labour. Th us we have ﬁ rms like 
Google which monet izes search without 
produ cing any content, or Facebook, which 
may not rely on a commons in the strict 
sense, but monet izes the human inter ac-
tion in social media. Th e second form of 
‘netarch ical’ capit al ism creates plat forms 
that enable peer- to-peer exchanges, where 
again no commons is neces sar ily produced,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
PILL, THE (POSTHUMAN ICON)
open value systems that can distrib ute 
value fairly in contri bu tion- based systems. 
 Further, the great poten tial of this emer-
gent system argu ably lies in the four 
characteristics of its produc tion methods 
( Kostakis, Roos and Bauwens 2015; Kostakis 
et al. 2017 ). First, by avoid ing planned 
obsol es cence in the design of the product; 
second, by sharing its tech nical and scientiﬁ c 
know ledge for open innov a tion; third, by 
mutu al iz ing phys ical infra struc tures for 
manu fac tur ing and relo c al iz ing produc-
tion through distrib uted micro factor ies/
maker spaces; 
fourth, 
by 
using 
open 
supply chains and open account ing mech-
an isms for mutual coordin a tion of prod- 
user communit ies; an open source circu lar 
economy may emerge which could contrib-
ute to the ﬁ ght against climate change and 
ecolo gical destruc tion. At the very least, this 
activ ity makes an import ant contri bu tion to 
the ongoing dialogue on the poten tial chal-
lenges for the incum bent system by provid-
ing a commons- oriented vision for radical 
change emer ging from the bottom. 
 See also Capitalocene and Chthulucene; 
Commons, the; Digital Citizenship; Digital 
Philosophy; Hacking Habitat; Resilience 
 Michel Bauwens and 
Vasilis Kostakis 
 PILL, THE (POSTHUMAN ICON)  
 We propose the oral contra cept ive pill as 
one of the posthu man icons of the twen ti-
eth century. It may be easy to forget in 
contem por ary times, where young women 
in the West have not lived with the fear 
of unwanted preg nan cies, but the classic 
metal strip supply ing three weeks of 
tiny white pills has had and still has a 
revolu tion ary impact on women’s lives all 
over the world. In fact, this small piece of 
commons. In short, the open product ive 
communit ies, which create and add value 
into the shared resource pools, are at the 
core of such an economy. Moreover, the 
entre pren eur ial coali tions, which create 
added value for the market, are around the 
digital commons. Further, the infra struc-
ture of cooper a tion is oft en managed and 
main tained by for- beneﬁ t asso ci ations, 
such as the free and open- source soft  ware 
found a tions. Changing the rela tion ship 
between the creat ive communit ies and 
the market players is argu ably key for an 
altern at ive, sustain able model for the 
commons economy. 
 In this new altern at ive model, the 
extract ive nature of netarch ical capit al ism 
is replaced by ethical entre pren eur ial coali-
tions. Th e latter create live li hoods around 
the commons in ways that enable contrib-
ut ors and these ﬁ rms to co- create commons. 
‘Open cooper at ives’ have been proposed 
as a generic concept for diﬀ er ent forms 
of ethical busi nesses that are mission- 
oriented, 
multi- stake holder 
governed, 
and are commit ted to the co- creation of 
commons ( Bauwens and Kostakis 2014 ). 
Such post- corpor ate entre pren eur ial forms 
are also some times called ‘phyles’, i.e. 
busi ness 
eco- systems 
which 
sustain 
communit ies and their commons. Amongst 
the examples that can be cited are the 
Enspiral network based in New Zealand; 
the Las Indias community based in Spain; 
the Sensorica open scientiﬁ c hard ware 
community based in Canada; Ethos in the 
 UK ; and Fora do Eixo in Brazil. Th ese new 
coali tions are oft en marked by a desire 
to combine three char ac ter ist ics, i.e. the 
sharing of know ledge (open ness), the 
sustain ab il ity of their phys ical produc tion 
processes, and the fair ness of the reward 
systems. Th erefore, these new forms of the 
commons economy are invent ing not only 
new prac tices which do not enclose know-
ledge (open busi ness models), but also
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PILL, THE (POSTHUMAN ICON) 
fortune to subsid ize the bio- medical research 
neces sary to develop the ﬁ rst birth control 
pill. Th e research was carried out through-
out the 1950s by biolo gist Gregory Pincus 
and was even tu ally ﬁ nal ized, paten ted and 
sold under the name of Enovid. 
 From the very begin ning of its mass 
adop tion, the Pill became one of the major 
symbols of second- wave femin ist move-
ments in the West. Th e control of repro-
duc tion was seen as a vital means to restore 
women’s owner ship over their own bodies, 
to freely enjoy sexual rela tions, and to 
improve their social status. Liberal femin-
ist Betty Friedan – co- founder in 1966 of 
the National Organization of Women and 
author of  Th e Feminine Mystique (1963) – 
was a passion ate campaigner for women’s 
access to free and full contra cept ive rights. 
Radical femin ist Shulamith Firestone, in 
 Th e Dialectic of Sex: Th e Case for Feminist 
Revolution ( 1970 ), high lighted the role of 
repro duct ive freedom and the struggle for 
free contra cep tion in the liber a tion of 
women. Anticipating later devel op ments, 
Firestone argued that a shift  of social 
prior it ies from repro duc tion to contra cep-
tion and the full devel op ment of repro-
duct ive tech no lo gies consti tuted the core 
elements of a femin ist revolu tion. 
 Politically, the most import ant contri bu-
tion of the Pill was to mater i al ize and 
repres ent publicly the categor ical distinc-
tion and separ a tion of sexu al ity from 
repro duc tion. Instigating twen ti eth- century 
sexual liber a tion move ments in the West, 
the Pill de- natur al ized repro duc tion and 
enabled women to become hetero sexu ally 
active without the danger of unwel come 
preg nan cies. Moreover, as a form of contra-
cep tion it oﬀ ered many advant ages over 
previ ous methods: it was conveni ent, highly 
eﬀ ect ive, female- controlled, separ ated from 
the act of inter course, and it did not require 
the consent – or even aware ness – of a male 
tech no logy was so success ful that it is 
simply known as ‘the Pill’. For the ﬁ rst time 
in human history the Pill made it possible 
for women to separ ate sexu al ity from 
repro duc tion, allow ing them to ﬁ nd a 
sexual freedom that had never existed 
before. Without fear of unwanted preg nan-
cies, a large number of chil dren, or worse, 
death in child birth, women could now 
enjoy and explore sexu al ity in ways that 
were impossible before. Its inven tion in the 
the sexual revolu tion of the 1960s. 
 Th e oral contra cept ive pill, a combin a-
tion of oestro gen and proges ter one, cele-
b rated its ﬁ ft ieth anniversary in 2010. 
Since its oﬃ   cial approval by the American 
Food and Drug Administration in 1960 
the Pill has achieved global endorse ment 
as the most widely used drug in the history 
of medi cine. And although there have been 
critiques of the Pill, it still caters to millions 
of women across the globe as a popular 
means of controlling fertil ity, regu lat ing 
menstru ation, detect ing or termin at ing 
preg nan cies and managing female meno-
pause. 
 Th e discov ery and devel op ment of the 
anti- concep tion pill and its subsequent 
adop tion was due to sustained eﬀ orts on 
the part of femin ists. Following up on the 
eﬀ orts of the ﬁ rst femin ist wave to achieve 
birth control at the end of the nine teenth 
century, for example by intro du cing the 
diaphragm, femin ists rein forced their 
search for safer and more reli able means of 
birth control aft er the Second World War. 
Pioneer of women’s repro duct ive rights, 
Margaret Sanger, helped found the Inter-
national Committee on Planned Parenthood 
as early as 1946, which was to evolve into the 
world’s largest non- govern mental inter na-
tional women’s health, family plan ning and 
birth control organ iz a tion. In the early 1950s, 
Sanger encour aged phil an throp ist, suﬀ ra-
gist and biolo gist Katharine McCormick to
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
PILL, THE (POSTHUMAN ICON)
bodies into insti tu tion al ized prac tices of 
both liber a tion and control ( Warren 1994 ). 
Following Foucault’s bio- polit ical analysis 
of the manage ment of repro duc tion and 
sexu al ity in the 1980s ( Foucault 2003 ,  2010 ), 
the radical femin ist claim of liber a tion via 
tech no logy was disputed. Th roughout the 
1990s femin ist studies of science and tech-
no logy pointed out the dangers as well as the 
advant ages of working within bio- polit ical 
systems of hormonal, bio- chem ical and 
genetic manage ment of bodies in a social 
order based on discip lin ing and punish ing 
( Oudshoorn 1994 ; McNeil and Franklin 
1991;  Haraway [1985] 1991 ;  Roberts 2008 ). 
 Queer critiques of natur al ized and 
essen tial ized gender iden tit ies and norms 
radic al ized these critiques. On the one 
hand Preciado ( 2013 ) emphas ized the 
normal iz ing power of the Pill that builds 
upon 
and 
endorses 
the 
under ly ing 
hormonal and endo crino lo gical design of 
‘normal’ female bodies. In this frame work, 
the Pill is taken as a ‘chem ical panop ticon’, 
that is to say a micro- instance that reﬂ ects 
macro- power form a tions – such as 
medical- legal insti tu tions, the nation- 
states and global networks of bio- genetic 
capit al iz a tion of life ( Cooper 2011 ). On the 
other hand, with the priv ilege of hind sight, 
it has become mani fest that the hiatus 
between repro duc tion and sexu al ity that 
was intro duced by the Pill in the 1960s 
marked not only a scientiﬁ c change of 
paradigm, but also a profound frac ture 
within patri archal family power form a-
tions and the perpetu ation of compuls ory 
hetero sexu al ity. It was, there fore, a water-
shed moment for the femin ist move ment. 
 In the light of this rich and complex 
history, of all the advant ages and chal-
lenges it repres ents, as well as its huge 
impact upon the lives of millions, we 
wonder why the Pill is not more widely 
celeb rated as the icon of a posthu man ist 
subject posi tion that eman cip ates women 
sexual partner ( Gordon 2007 ;  Kline 2010 ; 
 Oudshoorn 1994 ). 
 Th e isol a tion and synthesis of female 
sex hormones that led to the devel op ment 
of the contra cept ive pill also prepared the 
ground for modern repro duct ive tech -
no lo gies such as in vitro fertil iz a tion. 
Moreover, by opening the possib il ity of 
moth er hood to single and lesbian women 
( Rich 1995 ), the Pill paved the way for the 
rejec tion of compuls ory hetero sexu al ity 
through the promo tion of altern at ive 
kinship systems outside the patri archal 
constraints of the nuclear family. 
 Th e radical sting of the Pill is that, by 
making it possible for women to choose 
whether to have chil dren or not, it facil it-
ated their rejec tion of tradi tional family 
struc tures ( Diepenbrock 1998 ). Domestic 
life in the patri archal family presents clear 
disad vant ages for women by conﬁ n ing 
them to the role of care tak ing in the private 
sphere at the cost of exclu sion from the 
economic sphere. It isol ates men from the 
lives of their chil dren, and insti tutes a 
gendered economy that segreg ates repro-
duct ive labour and family life from wage 
labour (Labora Cuboniks 2015). Th e Pill 
supports a radical sexual polit ics for 
altern at ive family arrange ments. Th is has 
not escaped the atten tion of organ ized reli-
gions and conser vat ive polit ical parties, 
which have waged an all- out war against it. 
Up until today, the Pill is not easily avail-
able in Catholic coun tries or in coun tries 
with a strong Christian funda ment al ist 
pres ence. 
 Th e Pill’s detract ors have histor ic ally 
oﬀ ered counter- argu ments to stress its 
mixed bless ings. In the 1970s eco- femin ists 
adhered to authen tic notions of female 
nature result ing in the rejec tion of any 
scientiﬁ c manip u la tion of female bodies. 
Th is resist ance evolved into the idea that 
bio- chem ical contra cep tion is polit ic ally 
danger ous, because it inserts women’s
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PLACENTA POLITICS 
body, the foetus, in immun o lo gical terms. 
Th e placenta splits the subject from within, 
in a non- dialect ical process of internal 
diﬀ er en ti ations that predic ates the primacy 
of the ‘other within’. Yet, this highly signi-
ﬁ c ant conﬁ g ur a tion has remained unrep-
res en ted within phallo- logo centric logic. 
 Th erefore, I suggest moving placenta 
polit ics centre stage, but into a diﬀ er ent 
theor et ical direc tion. Firstly, placenta polit-
ics upholds an aﬃ  rm at ive and non- aggress-
ive bio- polit ics that opposes the milit ary 
termin o logy and concepts that are custom-
ary in scientiﬁ c discus sions of immun o logy. 
Th e immun iz a tion process is usually formu-
lated in terms of the indi vidual and collect-
ive bodies’ struggle for homeo static stabil ity 
and protec tion against external aggress ive 
forces. Secondly, this approach to immun o-
logy has been taken as an analogy for polit-
ics and governance. For instance, Esposito’s 
work on bio- polit ics (2008b) explores the 
immun o lo gical polit ical economy of hospit-
al ity and hostil ity. I ﬁ nd it disap point ing that 
what was origin ally a polit ics of life – bio- 
polit ics – which also included a reappraisal 
of the polit ics of dying and letting die, has 
become almost exclus ively focused on 
thanato- polit ics, to use Foucault’s term 
( 1977 ). In contem por ary discus sions, this 
issue blends with necro- polit ics ( Mbembe 
2003 ), that is to say exterm in a tion and 
extinc tion. Bio- polit ics should not posi tion 
life only on the horizon of death, but also as 
the gener at ive force of both human and 
non- human organ isms ( Braidotti 2006b ). In 
terms of the immun o lo gical debate this 
means that the ques tion is not that and how 
the organ ism is capable of self- preser va tion 
at the expense of some of its weak or 
diseased parts, but rather that in most cases 
it actu ally does not attack them. And I would 
like to add that, speciﬁ c ally in preg nancy, 
the organ ism does usually not expel 
the foetal other, but rather hosts it and 
nurtures it. 
from a natur al ized regime of subjug a tion. 
Why are other images so hastily embraced 
as posthu man icons, like the destruct ive 
image of the mush room cloud of a nuclear 
bomb, for instance, or the over- exposed 
mix of metal and wires in robot ics? Instead 
of these rather over bear ing images we 
suggest the humble Pill as one of the 
posthu man icons. Th e more modest 
‘wetware’ of the Pill should be recog nized 
for its revolu tion ary impact: it is a frontal 
attack on the natur al iz a tion of gender 
inequal it ies. Th e Pill test i ﬁ es to the visceral 
call that, if nature is unjust, then we must 
change nature (Xenofeminist Manifesto 
2015). 
 See also Bodies Politic; Geo-Hydro-Solar-
Bio-Techno Politics; Pregnant Posthuman; 
Xenofeminism; Placenta Politics. 
 Anneke Smelik and Elisa Fiore 
 PLACENTA POLITICS  
 Placenta polit ics is a term that I coined 
to indic ate the mater i al ist femin ist bio- 
polit ics of the rela tion between the mater-
ial mater nal body, the placenta and the 
foetus. I trans pose this mater nal- placental-
foetal connec tion into a nomadic frame so 
as to argue that it composes a gener at ive 
assemblage. Th e placental assemblage 
raises key issues of rela tion al ity, immunity 
and auto- immunity, which are best served 
by a neo- mater i al ist philo sophy of becom-
ing and aﬃ  rm at ive ethics within a monistic 
under stand ing of matter. I draw on the 
work of French femin ist biolo gist Hélène 
Rouch ( 1987 ), who was inspired by the 
philo sopher Luce Irigaray ( 1985a ,  1985b ) 
and by Lacanian psycho ana lysis to propose 
the biolo gical entity of the placenta as a 
third party that redeﬁ nes the rela tion ship 
between the mater nal body and the other
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
birth has taken place. Th is is a far cry from 
the thanato- polit ical or necro- polit ical 
discourse of the tactical expul sion of alien 
elements or the aggress ive elim in a tion of 
the alien other. Th e paradigm of placenta 
polit ics presents instead a model of gener-
at ive rela tion al ity. 
 In femin ist mater i al ist terms the 
mother-placenta-fetus assemblage can be 
read as a state of paci ﬁ st cooper a tion and 
co- creation between organ isms, in a 
speciﬁ c rela tional frame that facil it ates 
their co- exist ence, inter ac tion and growth. 
Th e placenta stresses the notion of evol u-
tion through mutual cooper a tion. I argue 
that the placenta is a power ful ﬁ gur a tion – 
Deleuze ( 1994 ) would call it ‘concep tual 
persona’ – for a co- creat ive and collab or at-
ive model between separ ate yet related 
organ isms, agents and living matter: 
mater nal, placental and foetal. Placenta 
polit ics 
is 
about 
aﬃ  rm at ive 
ethical 
encoun ters – it is the original form of trans-
 cor por eal ity. 
 I want to argue further that the placenta 
is the perfect ﬁ gur a tion for think ing both 
unity and diversity, speciﬁ city and diﬀ er-
ence within a monistic frame. It fore-
grounds nomadic diﬀ er ence as a process of 
diﬀ er en tial modu la tions by organ isms that 
deﬁ ne them selves by mutual rela tions 
within a common matter. By exten sion it 
allows us to rethink polit ical and ethical 
inter ac tion on the basis of a mater i ally 
groun ded under stand ing of subject- form-
a tion. Becoming subject is an embed ded 
and embod ied, rela tional and ethical 
process framed by multiple encoun ters 
with both human and non- human factors 
and agents. 
 In order to concep tu al ize this vision, 
the best theor et ical allies are the onto lo gic-
ally paci ﬁ st theor ists, inspired by crit ical 
Spinozism, like Deleuze ( 1988b ;  1992a ). A 
monistic philo sophy allows us to theor ize 
organic processes of collab or at ive growth, 
 Wolfe ( 2010 ) explores the immun o lo-
gical paradox with Derrida’s notion of the 
phar makon. Th is refers to the process by 
which poison is injec ted so that the pres-
ence of what Nancy ( 2000 ) would call ‘an 
intruder’ is registered by a consti tuted 
system. Th at encounter, which trig gers the 
infec tion or the disease, also creates a ﬁ rst 
line of defence against it. Th e ﬁ rst line of 
auto- immun o lo gical 
defence 
gestures 
towards a cure or to secure immunity from 
the very disease that is trig ger ing the 
compos i tion of the encounter. Th e auto- 
immun o lo gical prin ciple is that the patho-
gen that is injec ted in controlled doses into 
the body does not destroy the entirety of the 
organ ism, but helps the immune system to 
learn how to defend itself. Derrida’s ethics 
of immunity proposes not the exclu sion, 
but the incor por a tion and vicari ous substi-
tu tion of the vital/lethal other. 
 None of these bio- polit ical thinkers, 
however, ever take the mater nal body and 
the placental assemblage into consid er a-
tion, which makes Rouch’s work all the 
more signi ﬁ c ant. Th us, they miss a crucial 
dimen sion of the immunity process. In my 
view, placenta polit ics is neces sary to 
under stand the speciﬁ c form of auto- 
immunity that is the maternal-placental-
foetal assemblage. Pregnancy fore grounds 
the crucial idea that the immune system 
does not always attack what has been 
injec ted into the body. If we focus on 
insem in a tion, gest a tion and birth, the 
ques tion shift s to another plateau: what are 
we to make of the fact that the female body 
actu ally hosts and cares for the egg, then 
embryo, then foetus, then baby? Th e 
placenta is the oper at ive factor of immun-
o lo gic ally compat ib il ity: it is formed by the 
exten sion of the mater nal body’s blood 
vessels into another tissue that both 
connects and separ ates the embryo from 
the mater nal organ ism. It is ejected as an 
extra entity about thirty minutes aft er the
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PLACENTA POLITICS 
genetic elements, includ ing the multiple 
hormon ally 
loaded, 
contra cept ive- pill 
driven, tech no lo gic ally medi ated exten ded 
mother- machines ( Roberts 2016 ). Th e 
toxic phar ma co lo gical aspects of contem-
por ary repro duc tion ( Preciado 2013 ) 
expose the gender system as a machinery 
that is currently multi plied, pulped, upheld, 
hacked, re- construc ted and abol ished on a 
daily basis. Both gene- editing and gender- 
editing have become part of our vocab u-
lary and our social as well as tech no lo gical 
prac tices. 
 It follows that we need more studies of 
placenta polit ics and the immun o lo gical 
paradigm within the femin ist frame work 
of bodily neo- mater i al ist posthu man 
thought. By exten sion, it is also import ant 
to re- frame the mater nal body. Where 
placenta polit ics oﬀ ers a new line of 
thought for bio- polit ics and thereby a new 
possib il ity for crit ical reﬂ ec tion on both 
rela tional ethics and repro duct ive labour, 
the category of the preg nant posthu man 
(see Pregnant Posthuman) posits the 
mater nal body as a subject, which supplies 
us with a ﬁ gure as a start ing point for 
critique, for re- think ing itself, and for 
devel op ing and defend ing a diﬀ er ent, 
sexuate ethics. 
 Cyberfeminism 
and 
Xenofeminism 
argue that the mater nal body – tech nic ally 
female (see Xenofeminsim) – is not one. 
Th e myriad of tech no lo gic ally medi ated 
prac tices and socially diﬀ er en ti ated modes 
of moth er ing, ranging from surrog acy to 
the recently approved three- parent family, 
are the result of the pervas ive impact of the 
appar atus of repro duct ive tech no lo gies and 
socio- economic prac tices. Th e explo sion of 
the alleged linear ity of the repro duct ive 
process also intro duces new actors, from 
external donors to internal gene- editing 
prac tices, all of them reliant on tech no lo-
gical medi ation. Placenta polit ics respects 
this complex ity while fore ground ing the 
insert ing complex ity at the heart of philo-
soph ical thought. In this context, the 
maternal-placental-fetal assemblage can 
be under stood as a ﬁ gur a tion of aﬃ  rm at-
ive rela tion al ity and multiple becom ings. 
Th e placenta func tions as an inter face of 
multiple particles and compon ents that 
jointly sustain the dynamic process of 
forming new organ isms. Th is living 
process enacts a complex dynam ics and 
expresses an aﬃ  rm at ive vision of life as a 
cooper at ive eﬀ ort. Placenta polit ics so 
deﬁ ned expresses the vital force of the 
multiple agents and forces that co- exist 
through trans form at ive encoun ters. Th us 
it is not only the case that the bio- polit ical 
and the thanato- polit ical rela tions exist in 
a continuum – in keeping with Foucault’s 
original insight – but also that they are 
consti tuted by hetero gen eous assemblages 
of diverse compon ents. Placenta polit ics 
can be fully situ ated within the contem-
por ary posthu man land scape. 
 Th is has a number of implic a tions also 
for contem por ary posthu man femin ist 
polit ics ( Braidotti 2016a ). Firstly, knowing 
that contem por ary nomadic or ‘dividual’ 
posthu man 
subjects 
are 
consti tuted 
through processes of mutual speciﬁ c a tion 
and diﬀ er en tial modu la tion, we can deﬁ ne 
sexual diﬀ er ence as one of the motors of 
multiple diﬀ er ing within a common 
matter. Th e binary gender system is just 
a mech an ism to capture this sexed multi-
pli city, which aims at redu cing and dis -
cip lin ing the inﬁ n ite modu la tions and 
the ‘thou sand little sexes’ ( Deleuze and 
Guattari 1988 : 277), which consti tute our 
virtual embod ied and embed ded, aﬀ ect ive 
and rela tional struc ture. 
 Secondly, we need to consider the high 
level of tech no lo gical medi ation – both 
bio- genetic and inform a tional – that 
surrounds sexu al ity and repro duc tion 
today. Contemporary bodies are shaped by 
a complex inter ac tion of social and bio-
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 See also  Pill, the; Pregnant Posthuman; 
Joy; Bios; Material Feminisms; Feminist 
Posthumanities; 
Trans- corpor eal ity; 
Trans*; Feminicity. 
 Rosi Braidotti 
 PLANETARY  
 Th e plan et ary can be taken as a critique 
of the proﬁ t- minded logic of glob al iz a-
tion. Th e image of the ‘blue planet’, in 
partic u lar the photo taken of the Earth 
rising above the Moon by the Apollo 8 
crew in 1968, along with the ulti mate ‘blue 
marble’ photo taken four years later, 
allowed the planet to be perceived visu ally 
for the ﬁ rst time in its entirety. Looking in 
on our world from the cosmic ‘outside’ 
repres en ted a new stage in human self- 
conscious ness. 
It 
func tioned 
like 
a 
Lacanian mirror ing – both frag men ted 
and harmo ni ous – that brought aware ness 
of the unity but also the ﬁ nitude of the 
Earth. At a time in which the world was 
riven by the ideo lo gical divides of the 
Cold War and living in fear of nuclear 
cata strophe, the image projec ted both a 
reas sur ing vision of harmony and a pre-
sen ti ment of envir on mental risk. With its 
asso ci ations of a sublime, inter con nec ted 
and fragile biosphere, the symbol ism of the 
blue planet countered the util it arian, tech-
no lo gical and economic logic of the global, 
with which plan et ary conscious ness has 
been forced to compete since the outset. 
 Th e meteoric rise of economic glob al iz-
a tion in the wake of the signing of world 
trade deals in the post-Cold War era created 
a major obstacle to eﬀ orts to tackle climate 
change on a global scale, while unpre ced en-
ted levels of economic growth have further 
fuelled carbon emis sions. Th e legal and 
policy frame work enforced by the  WTO 
guaranteed the rights of multi- national 
speciﬁ city of the maternal-placental-fetal 
assemblage. 
 A posthu man theory of the subject 
emerges there fore as an empir ical project 
that aims at exper i ment ing with what 
contem por ary, bio- tech no lo gic ally medi-
ated bodies are capable of doing. Th ese 
non- proﬁ t exper i ments with contem por-
ary subjectiv ity actu al ize the virtual 
possib il it ies of an expan ded, rela tional self 
that 
func tions 
in 
a 
nature-culture 
continuum and is tech no lo gic ally medi-
ated. Not surpris ingly, this non- proﬁ t, 
exper i mental approach to diﬀ er ent prac-
tices of subjectiv ity runs against the spirit 
of contem por ary capit al ism. Th e perversity 
of this system, and its undeni able success, 
consists in re- attach ing the poten tial for 
exper i ment a tion with new subject form a-
tions, back to an over in ﬂ ated notion of 
possess ive indi vidu al ism ( Macpherson 
1962 ), fuelled by a quant it at ive range of 
consumers’ choices. Th is is precisely the 
oppos ite direc tion from the non- proﬁ t 
exper i ment a tions with intens ity, which I 
defend in my theory of posthu man 
subjectiv ity. 
 A neo- mater i al ist nomadic approach 
allows us to analyse and re- think this 
posthu man ‘exploded mater nal body’ thor-
oughly and to situate ‘femin i city’ (see 
Feminicity) in an ethic ally account able 
frame work. Th e impact of the fast- progress-
ing repro duct ive tech no lo gies upon the 
complex mater nal assemblage is best 
addressed within a neo- mater i al ist nomadic 
philo sophy of becom ing geared to an 
aﬃ  rm at ive rela tional ethics. Th e emphasis 
on monism casts a new light on explor a-
tions of the shift  ing bound ar ies between life 
and death and on the ethical and polit ical 
implic a tions 
for 
posthu man 
thought. 
Placenta polit ics expresses not only a new 
immun o lo gical paradigm, but also the 
posthu man polit ics of aﬃ  rm a tion of life as 
radical imman ence.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PLANETARY 
 Responding to the crisis of anthro po-
centric criti cism, Gayatri Spivak in Death 
of a Discipline raised the ques tion of what 
it would mean to ‘imagine ourselves as 
plan et ary subjects rather than global 
agents’ (2003). For Spivak, the crit ical 
poten tial of plan et ar ity lies primar ily in 
oﬀ er ing a mode of iden ti ﬁ c a tion that does 
not deﬁ ne itself in oppos i tion to the Other, 
and only obliquely in the ecolo gical sense 
of being ‘custodi ans of our very own 
planet’. As a stra tegic choice of termin o-
logy, the notion of the plan et ary allows us 
to sidestep the impasse between advoc ates 
of a cosmo pol itan iden tity as an altern at ive 
to ethni city and nation- based forms of 
collect ive belong ing, and those in favour 
of retool ing national iden tity as a mode of 
resist ance to the economic imper i al ism 
of glob al iz a tion. From the point of view of 
the current sense of urgency regard ing the 
need for a collect ive response to ecolo gical 
crisis, however, Spivak’s original ques tion 
could be refor mu lated more assert ively to 
ask what it would mean to see ourselves as 
‘plan et ary agents’, acting on behalf and in 
the name of the planet, rather than as 
‘global subjects’, pass ively accept ing the 
rules of the game of glob al iz a tion. 
 While the global features both as a 
time less abstrac tion and as a delim iter of a 
discrete period of human history, whose 
begin nings are traced back either several 
decades to the commu nic a tions revolu tion 
or centur ies to the medi eval roots of world 
trade, the plan et ary inhab its a more exten-
ded tempor al ity that both exceeds the 
human and has its own speciﬁ c histor icity. 
It impli citly acknow ledges the fact that 
during the ‘deep time’ reach ing back 
millions of years before the advent of 
human ity, the Earth had its own history 
that was as event ful and unpre dict able as 
human history. Attention to the deep 
history of the Earth contex tu al izes the 
activ it ies of our species, remind ing us of 
corporations to escape social regulation, 
take advantage of cheap labour and 
negotiate major tax breaks. It also created a 
political constituency that has successfully 
blocked measures to come up with an 
eﬀ ective international response to global 
warming. Th e rationale of globalization, 
which views the Earth as a resource to be 
competitively exploited for maximum 
proﬁ t, can be contrasted with the planetary 
ideals expressed in Bolivia’s 2010 Law of 
Mother Earth, which granted nature equal 
rights to humans and deﬁ ned the Earth as 
‘a unique, indivisible, self- regulating com-
mu nity of interrelated beings’. 
 Tension between the ethos of the plan-
et ary and the glob al ized mindset can also 
be felt in theor et ical spheres. Writing 
on the accel er at ing ‘plan et ary crisis of 
climate change’ in 2009, histor ian Dipesh 
Chakrabarty made the signi ﬁ c ant admis-
sion that two decades of study ing ‘theor ies 
of glob al iz a tion, Marxist analysis of capital, 
subal tern studies, and post co lo nial criti-
cism’ had not prepared him for the ‘plan et-
ary conjunc ture within which human ity 
ﬁ nds itself today’. In a world trans ﬁ gured 
by ecolo gical crisis, on the brink of mass 
extinc tion and facing irre vers ible changes 
to oceans and atmo sphere, crit ical theory 
is also in the midst of a paradigm shift . Th e 
general neglect within histor ical crit ical 
theory of envir on mental issues, symbol-
ized by Michel Foucault’s infam ous expres-
sion of his ‘detest a tion of nature’ by liter ally 
turning his back on the land scape, was 
based on the rejec tion of attempts to see 
the world as an ecolo gical total ity as irre-
triev ably essen tial ist and denial of the 
exist ence of nature as anything other than 
a self- refer en tial linguistic category. By 
contrast, signs of an incip i ent plan et ary 
turn can be recog nized in mater i al ist posi-
tions of Speculative Realism and object- 
oriented onto logy, as well as in the wider 
theor iz a tion of the posthu man.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
another, but rather artic u lates a polit ical 
agenda in which the Earth’s inhab it ants are 
connec ted by a plan et ary ecosys tem that 
surpasses man- made borders. To speak of 
the plan et ary auto mat ic ally includes both 
non-Western cultures and the non- human 
inhab it ants of the earth, but also the mater-
i al ity of the biosphere, from the atmo-
sphere and oceans to the plan et ary crust, 
life forms and phenom ena that are unre-
ﬂ ect ingly omitted from the global. A vision 
of plan et ary citizen ship, based on what 
Ursula K. Heise describes as ‘the envir on-
mental imagin a tion of the global’ (2008), 
also holds out the prospect of sidestep ping 
the impasse between nation al ism and 
cosmo pol it an ism that char ac ter ized the 
era of glob al iz a tion, and points towards a 
geopol it ical project based on the values of 
inter spe cies solid ar ity and envir on mental 
justice. 
 See also Anthropocene; Cosmopolitics; 
Earth; 
Ecosophy; 
Object-Oriented 
Ontology. 
 Maja and Reuben Fowkes 
 PLASTICITY  
 As used in the work the French philo-
sopher Catherine Malabou, the word ‘plas-
ti city’ derives from the Greek plas sein, 
which has a dual meaning: 1) to receive 
form (like clay is plastic); and 2) to give 
form (like surgery can be plastic). Malabou 
adds a third meaning, which is espe cially 
suited to philo soph ical use: 3) plastic in 
refer ence to the anni hil a tion of form (as 
in plastic explos ives). 
 Strictly speak ing, this versat ile notion 
of plas ti city is put forward in line with 
contem por ary inter pret a tions of G. W. F. 
Hegel, which try to elab or ate a Hegelianism 
the contin gent nature of anthro po centric 
assump tions and making it possible to 
imagine ‘the Earth aft er us’. Th e moment-
ous of the changes made by humans to 
the life of the planet is in fact condensed 
in the real iz a tion that long aft er we are 
gone the eﬀ ects of anthro po genic climate 
change will still be felt through the likely 
suppres sion of the next two geolo gical ice 
ages, due ﬁ ft y and a hundred thou sand 
years from now. 
 A self- contained version of plan et ary 
think ing, criti cized for its maver ick science 
but inﬂ u en tial for the envir on mental 
imagin a tion, can be found in James 
Lovelock’s Gaia hypo thesis. Formulated in 
the 1960s and 1970s, Gaia is based on the 
claim that there is an all- encom passing, 
non- human agency oper at ing on the level 
of the planet and direc ted towards the 
main ten ance of equi lib rium through self- 
regu lat ing changes to the oceans and 
atmo sphere. Like the notion of deep time, 
the Gaia hypo thesis removes humans from 
the centre of the story, releg at ing our 
species some where below microbes on 
the scale of import ance to the Earth’s 
pro cesses. Lovelock was convinced that 
although 
tech no lo gical 
devel op ments 
might even tu ally prove fatal for the human 
species, their chances of endan ger ing 
the life of Gaia as a whole were ‘very 
weak indeed’. Today, aware ness of the scale 
of anthro po genic changes to the planet 
raises the spectre of humans over power ing 
even the mighty Earth goddess Gaia, 
crash ing her self- regu lat ing cyber netic 
system to reach a point of no return to 
equi lib rium. 
 As a nascent polit ical project, the appeal 
to the plan et ary responds to the oblig a tion 
in an age of ecolo gical crisis to tran scend 
the uniquely human concerns of the global. 
It is an attempt to conceive of the conscious-
ness of the planet as a whole, where a plan-
et ary geopol it ics reﬂ ects not the global
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PLASTICITY 
Malabou’s thought. In the attempt to 
adhere to a plastic ‘abso lute’, she impreg-
nates Hegel’s two senses of plas ti city with a 
third: a plas ti city of destruc tion or decon-
struc tion. 
 While it can be said that Malabou’s 
notion of plas ti city is to some degree a 
return to Hegel, she also believes that her 
own version of the concept is uniquely of 
our own time in two key ﬁ elds: in terms of 
philo sophy it is able to over come the key 
concepts of the previ ous epochs, thus 
placing philo sophy in a posi tion of (once 
again) being uniquely of its time, and in 
terms of science plas ti city oﬀ ers, in 
Malabou’s view, the best account of neuro-
bi o logy, which opens up the possib il ity of 
a new mater i al ism. She believes that 
plas ti city is the ‘domin ant formal motif of 
inter pret a tion and the most product ive 
exeget ical and heur istic tool of our time’ 
( Malabou 2009a : 57). It is with regard to 
this claim that Malabou ﬁ nds an expres-
sion of her own notion of plas ti city in the 
capa city of brain damage to completely 
destroy 
someone’s 
person al ity, 
while 
retain ing the option for a new person al ity 
to emerge (through the other senses of 
plas ti city). She then points towards the fact 
that this kind of capa city, that is inher ent 
to the brain synapses, lies radic ally outside 
of the psycho ana lytic mode of explan a tion 
(although Freud local izes this extern al ity 
in the possib il ity of trauma, in the epitomic 
‘beyond’ 
of 
the 
pleas ure 
prin ciple) 
( Malabou 2007 : 79). Since the psycho ana-
lytic ability to explain is, like its ideal ist and 
phenomen o lo gical prede cessors, strictly 
depend ent on what psychic reality allows 
us access to, Malabou attempts to develop 
the topo logy of the brain wound as a 
plastic way of relat ing to a realm of mater-
i al ity that is inde pend ent of the subject iv-
ism involved in avenues of research which 
are depend ent on a psychic reality (recent 
research in biology and neur o logy also 
that is up to the task to carry out progress-
ive socio- polit ical analysis (this attempt 
natur ally allies Malabou with Slavoj Žižek, 
Judith Butler and Adrian Johnston). 
Ultimately, Malabou seeks to develop a 
mater i al ism that func tions as the basis of a 
new philo sophy of spirit. ( Malabou 2012b : 
212) Since her disser ta tion,  Th e Future of 
Hegel , Malabou has been concerned with a 
Hegelianism that is able to have a sense for 
the future, despite Martin Heidegger’s 
claims to the contrary ( Malabou 2004 : 5). 
In order to address this ques tion, she 
adapts the Hegelian concept of plas ti city, 
in a strategy which, follow ing a clas sic ally 
decon struc tion ist meth od o logy, accords 
a relat ively insig ni ﬁ c ant element of Hegel’s 
argu ment a tion a power which is able 
to, avant la lettre, deal with latter- day 
Heideggerian concerns regard ing time. 
Where Malabou resol utely diﬀ ers from her 
disser ta tion super visor Jacques Derrida is 
in the fact that she aims to use this concept 
to vindic ate the use of dialectics as a 
method of philo soph ical and social 
analysis, rather than completely destabil ize 
it. Although Hegel did not intend the third 
meaning of plas ti city (explos ive plas ti city), 
it is an essen tial part of Malabou’s project 
to read back into Hegel this explos ive side 
of subjectiv ity, which she believes Hegel 
anti cip ated in some respects ( Malabou 
2009a : 9). 
 In terms of her central prob lem atic, 
Malabou professes a fascin a tion with 
notions which allow for an ampli ﬁ c a tion 
of their onto lo gical scope (such as time 
in Heidegger and writing in Derrida) 
( Malabou 2009a : 13). She believes that it is 
a certain histor ical tend ency that enables 
these notions to come forth in their 
respect ive epochs. In her insist ence on this 
histor icity, all the while still cling ing to the 
meta- applic ab il ity of her own notion of 
plas ti city, it becomes abund antly clear that 
Hegelianism really lies at the core of
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
of Malabou’s argu ment is the fact that the 
popular concep tion of neuro bi o logy is 
artic u lated solely in terms of ﬂ ex ib il ity, 
thus creat ing the impres sion amongst 
those subscrib ing to the ideo logy of ﬂ ex i -
b il ity that they are merely bring ing the 
manage ment of labour and mental health-
care in line with the scientiﬁ c facts regard-
ing our neur o lo gical needs. 
 Th e obvious implic a tion of Malabou’s 
line of reas on ing here is that we have, no 
doubt with the best of inten tions, manu-
fac tured a new normalcy, which repro-
duces all the old models of exclu sion along 
the vectors of mental illness and poverty. 
Against ﬂ ex ib il ity, Malabou main tains that 
we must increase our conscious ness of 
the brain, in the service of eman cip at ory 
polit ical under stand ing (53). Evidently, 
although she does not artic u late why, 
Malabou believes that this type of 
conscious ness is more eﬀ ect ive than what 
philo soph ers typic ally advoc ate; the educa-
tion of the people through unres tric ted 
concep tual thought, which in this case 
would typic ally start from the fact of 
inequal ity. What 
Malabou 
advoc ates 
instead is to start public aware ness from 
the notion of the plas ti city of our brain in 
rela tion to our indi vidual and social poten-
tial. In essence she proposes a redeﬁ n i tion 
of the self, in which brain plas ti city func-
tions as univer sal in terms of a poten tial 
that is radic ally diﬀ er en ti ated at the indi-
vidual level. Th is reopens the door to 
psycho ana lysis, which stresses the fact 
that, although we may all be radic ally 
diﬀ er ent, we share some initial struc tures 
at the start of our personal histor ies (in the 
form of child hood) which can be treated 
in a univer sal way. It is indeed on this 
ubiquit ous ﬁ lial struc ture that Malabou 
proposes that a general theory of trauma 
should be built (2012b: xix). From this 
perspect ive, the event of cereb ral trauma, 
an acci dent leading to a wound, presents a 
speaks of plas ti city in topo lo gical models). 
In Malabou’s view, plas ti city provides a 
‘decon struc tion of the real’, which ‘organ-
izes the real aft er meta phys ics’ ( Malabou 
2009a : 57), which thus engenders a new 
mater i al ism that allows us to ‘moment ar ily 
char ac ter ize the mater ial organ iz a tion of 
thought and being’ (ibid.: 61). 
 Th e char ac ter iz a tion of the brain as 
plastic allows Malabou to leave behind the 
discus sions on the determ in ism brought 
up in connec tion with neur o lo gical 
descrip tions of the brain. Since the brain is 
plastic, can be moulded and is continu ally 
chan ging in response to our exper i ences, it 
is instead funda ment ally free ( Malabou 
2009b : 11, 21). In part, ‘our brain is what we 
do with it’ (ibid.: 30) and as such, Malabou 
is attempt ing to stim u late a culture of 
‘neur onal liber a tion’ rather than a biolo-
gical determ in ism (ibid.) She thus objects 
to models of the brain as cent ral ized 
machines or simple computers, because 
these do not capture the plas ti city of the 
brain, espe cially in the sense of the capa-
city for destruc tion and subsequent 
reform a tion (33–5). However, Malabou 
warns that plas ti city should not be 
considered to be completely cotermin ous 
with freedom and should not be confused 
with the ability to act (48). Oﬀ ering some 
social critique, Malabou objects to the 
ideo logy of ﬂ ex ib il ity that is currently 
preval ent in manage ment of labour, which 
leads to the belief that those who are not 
deemed ﬂ ex ible, or rather ‘immob ile’, are 
releg ated to poverty (51). According to 
Malabou, this ideo logy has also penet rated 
into mental health care, ensur ing that 
mental illness will be treated solely with 
the aim of the restor a tion of ﬂ ex ib il ity, in 
the terms dictated by ﬂ ex ible labour, under 
the auspices of return ing the patient to 
society (medic a tion being one of the 
means employed by this ideo logy of 
‘restor ing action’) (51–2). An essen tial part
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POLITICAL AFFECT 
F. M. van Helmont described Leibniz’s 
monads as ‘vis plastica’. William Harvey 
used ‘vis plastica’ to describe epigen esis, 
and his work was in turn used for a popular 
explan a tion of fossils, as the spon tan eous 
results of the plastic latency of the earth. 
Th is long tradi tion of plas ti city curi ously 
shows the inter con nec tion of plas ti city 
and nature, which Malabou ulti mately re- 
inserts into Hegel’s notion. In a certain 
sense, Malabou restores the original spir-
itual mater i al ism of the term. 
 See also Critical Posthuman Th eory; Neo/
New Materialism; Neuronal Aesthetics. 
 Tom Giesbers 
 POLITICAL AFFECT  
 Th e ‘aﬀ ect ive turn’, by react ing against the 
previ ous ‘linguistic turn’, has brought bodies 
to the atten tion of cultural studies, human-
it ies and social science schol ars, not merely 
as sites for the inscrip tion of power rela-
tions by tran scend ent insti tu tions, but as 
sites whose imman ent poten tials allow for 
rela tions with other bodies that parti cip ate 
in ﬂ uc tu at ing power rela tions. With the 
aﬀ ect ive turn, bodies have thus moved from 
a blank slate to living beings, from clay to be 
moulded to creatures feeling their way 
through ever- chan ging worlds. Th e aﬀ ect-
ive turn has two modes: a neur o lo gical one 
to which the name Sylvan Tomkis (thanks 
mostly to  Sedgwick and Frank 1995 ) is 
attached, and a Deleuzean-Spinozist one, 
exem pli ﬁ ed by Brian Massumi ( 2002 ). 
While Tomkins posited nine neuro bi o lo-
gic ally hard wired and recom bin ant aﬀ ects, 
aﬀ ect for the Deleuzo-Spinozists is twofold: 
the change in the mater ial rela tions of an 
aﬀ ected body and the concom it ant change 
in the inter act ive poten tials of that body 
(its ‘power’). Intertwined with Deleuze’s 
unique type of trauma, which provides a 
special insight into the destruct ive aspect 
of cereb ral plas ti city, much in the same 
way as ﬁ lial trauma provides insight into 
its devel op mental aspects (ibid.: 11). 
Finally, Malabou draws paral lels between 
brain trauma and social trauma (terror ist 
attacks, sexual abuse, oppres sion and 
slavery) in terms of the destruct ive aspect 
of plas ti city; in both cases, a viol ence cuts 
the subject oﬀ  from its accu mu lated 
memor ies (213). 
 Th ere is then a resol utely norm at ive 
compon ent to the study of brain plas ti city, 
because Malabou seeks to determ ine what 
we should do with our brain, instead of 
what we are doing with our brain. She does 
not simply present a thesis about radical 
subjectiv ity, but rather a reﬂ ect ive concern 
about the way our under stand ing of the 
brain has been util ized by capit al ism, in 
the form of the ideo logy of ﬂ ex ib il ity, 
which obfus cates our conscious ness of the 
plas ti city of our brain (2009b: 12, 33). For 
Malabou, any study of our cereb ral powers 
imme di ately implies a polit ical dimen sion, 
since it aims to deﬁ ne what we can and 
cannot do (ibid.: 32). Where Malabou 
departs from (and attempts to correct) 
both the ideo logy of ﬂ ex ib il ity and the 
accounts provided by neur o lo gists is in the 
fact that she main tains that destruc tion is 
an essen tial part of cereb ral plas ti city, 
which restores its dialect ical nature: ‘if we 
didn’t destroy ourselves a bit, we could not 
live’ (74). 
 Th e notion of plas ti city has deeper and 
more surpris ing roots than Malabou 
propounds. Although 
she 
frequently 
claims that Hegel’s use of the term in 1807 
was unique, it is likely that he adopted the 
notion from F. W. J. Schelling, who oft en 
used it as a way to describe nature (out of 
which subjectiv ity emerges). J. W. Goethe 
referred to the plastic nature of man and, 
in the seven teenth century, the alchem ist
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
the produc tion of aﬀ ect- laden intu ition is 
depend ent on the state of one’s body at any 
one time (Haidt brieﬂ y refers to Damasio’s 
‘somatic marker theory’ ( Damasio 1995 ) at 
this point in his essay), we see some thing 
of the same basic insight as aﬀ ect theory, 
a general releg a tion of cold, rational 
conscious ness to a subor din ate or perhaps 
even fully epiphen om enal status, the limit 
case of a cooling of aﬀ ect to its minimal 
intens ity. 
 Political aﬀ ect is among several formu-
la tions of aﬀ ect ive theory that are criti-
cized by Linda Zerilli in a recent article 
( 2015 ). Zerilli takes up the deﬂ a tion ary 
account 
of 
concep tual/propos i tional 
know ledge developed by Jason Stanley 
( Stanley and Krakauer 2013 ;  Stanley 2011 ) 
in which propos i tional know ledge need 
not be linguist ic ally artic ul able to count 
as know ledge. Th is deﬂ a tion ary account is 
then set up as a third option to supposedly 
non- concep tual aﬀ ect and what Zerilli 
sees as the hyper- intel lec tu al ist account of 
concep tual/propos i tional know ledge that 
would require linguistic artic ul ab il ity. Th e 
deﬂ a tion ary account would then avoid the 
binary set up between the intel lec tu al ists 
and the aﬀ ect ive non- concep tu al ists such as 
Dreyfusian phenomen o lo gists, Deleuzian/
Spinozist aﬀ ect theor ists, and Damasio, 
Panksepp, LeDoux and other aﬀ ect ive 
neur os cient ists. For Zerilli, the aﬀ ect ive 
schools are caught in a mirror- image 
binar ism with their hyper- intel lec tu al ist 
oppon ents with whom they share a ‘layer- 
cake’ onto logy (linguist ic ally artic ul able 
know ledge resting on a not- just linguis-
tically artic u lated but thor oughly non- 
concep tual layer of engaged coping, virtual 
feeling, or neur o lo gical ﬁ rings). Zerilli’s 
chal lenge is to avoid a posi tion that would 
‘turn judg ment into a kind of post hoc 
ration al iz a tion of primed responses’. 
 Political aﬀ ect avoids the hyper- 
intel lec tu al ist 
concep tu al ity 
versus 
virtual/actual distinc tion, this scheme 
enables aﬀ ect to be ‘an entire, vital, and 
modu lat ing ﬁ eld of myriad becom ings 
across human and nonhu man’ ( Gregg and 
Seigworth, 2010 : 6). Th e embod ied, bio-
logical, drive mode (Tomkins) and the 
bound ary- cross ing, assemblage- produ cing 
trans versal mode (Deleuze-Spinoza) do not 
exhaust the aﬀ ect ive turn, however. Gregg 
and Seigworth see a number of other 
approaches in contem por ary aﬀ ect theory: 
various elements of bodily scaﬀ old ing with 
tech no lo gical objects, as in ‘exten ded 
mind’ discourses; cyber net ics; ‘proces sual 
incor por eal ity’ or Spinozism; bio- cultural 
inter weav ings or social ized desire; invest ig-
a tions of the felt and lived exper i ence of 
margin al ized peoples; the biolo gical, neur o-
lo gical and cognit ive sciences; soci olo gical 
and philo soph ical work on the emotions; 
and science studies ( Gregg and Seigworth 
2010 : 6-8). 
 Political aﬀ ect ( Protevi 2009 ) is a 
rough- and-ready 
connec tion 
of 
the 
Tomkins and Deleuze-Spinoza modes – an 
acknow ledge ment of the bio- cultural 
reality of human nature, the way in which 
our biology is such to be open to our 
culture, our nature is to be open to nurture. 
We are hard- wired with regard to the 
patterns of basic aﬀ ects, but their trig gers 
and thresholds are exper i en tially formed 
as we move in and out of bio- social-
technical assemblages. All in all, it’s a 
roughly 
Nietzschean 
outlook: 
our 
conscious ness is shaped by our (inter-)
corpor eal natures, which make them selves 
known in aﬀ ect ive pushes and pulls, highs 
and lows. Political aﬀ ect also takes account 
of Jonathan Haidt’s prom in ent article, ‘Th e 
Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail’ 
(2001). For Haidt, moral judge ment mostly 
follows intu ition, the sudden appear ance 
in conscious ness of an aware ness of what 
is the right thing to do in a situ ation. Such 
intu itions are aﬀ ect- laden, and insofar as
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POLITICAL AFFECT 
phor is used guardedly’ (2002: 35; italics in 
original). It is the feeling of change in the 
rela tion of bodies politic: the feeling 
of the change in the ﬁ rst- order body politic 
in the encounter with another body politic 
(thus not an intro spect ive percep tion of an 
isol ated body, but a feeling of the body 
in rela tion), and the feeling of how the 
present feeling might vary in rela tion to 
what might happen next in a variety of 
futures. Aﬀ ect then is a resol u tion of a 
complex diﬀ er en tial ﬁ eld, relat ing changes 
in bodies politic, or more precisely, the 
changes in the rela tions among chan ging 
ﬁ rst- and second- order bodies politic. 
Now in some cases, situ ations are ‘well in 
hand’, and aﬀ ects collapse into emotions 
having some thing of a repres ent at ive func-
tion: they show us how things actu ally are 
and how they will evolve. But this is 
emotion as subject ive capture of aﬀ ect. In 
some other cases, the situ ation exceeds our 
ability to make sense of it; aﬀ ect extends 
beyond the body’s ability to emotion ally 
repres ent the situ ation; we are over-
whelmed and thrown out of kilter. 
 Here we are at the limit of faculty of 
sens ib il ity: these situ ations cannot be 
sensed from an actu al ized point of view of 
recog ni tion and common sense (‘it makes 
no sense’), but can only be felt, that is, 
‘sensed’, as point ing to a diﬀ er en tial ﬁ eld 
beyond ‘normal’ sense- making as recog ni-
tion, as concep tual- emotional capture and 
processing. In other words, an intens ive 
encounter outside normal/actual aﬀ ect ive 
cogni tion habits (modelled as a move 
outside the basin of attrac tion, or better, 
outside the normal attractor layout as 
habitual response capa cit ies), provides 
access to the virtual. Th is access is exper i-
enced as a strange feeling, a feeling of 
being out of step with your normal habits; 
in this strange ness lies the poten tial to 
open an adapt ive response as creat ive 
event throw ing up a new attractor layout, 
non- cognit ive aﬀ ect oppos i tion Zerilli 
posits by its incor por a tion of the notion of 
‘aﬀ ect ive cogni tion’. Th is takes both elements 
all the way down, in keeping with Evan 
Th ompson’s ‘enact iv ism’ posi tion in his 
Mind in Life (2007). Enactivism holds to a 
notion of sense- making, which is found 
even in single- celled organ isms. So polit-
ical aﬀ ect does not hold to a layer- cake 
onto logy: aﬀ ect and cogni tion are part ners 
all the way down. It’s certainly true that 
almost- completely-desubjectifying exper i-
ences of rage and panic exist, but they are 
rare epis odes of approach ing a limit that 
activ ates ‘aﬀ ect programs’ ( Griﬃ  ths 1997 ). 
Aﬀ ect provides sali ence (draws cognit ive 
atten tion) but doesn’t over whelm/under-
mine cogni tion, though when we get close 
to the limit of desub jec ti ﬁ c a tion our qual-
it at ive analyses should change. 
 To pick up the posit ive formu la tion of 
polit ical aﬀ ect as sense- making, the diﬀ er-
en tial rela tion in the sense- making of 
bodies politic is that between poten tials for 
becom ings or assemblage form a tions 
which vary as the members of the encounter 
make a ‘move’ in the social game, moves in 
which someone oﬀ ers, commands, cajoles, 
persuades, pleads and so on. Th e possible 
moves of a situ ation are the moves allowed 
by embod ied compet ences. But these 
possible moves are them selves taken up in 
rela tions of change: what Deleuze and 
Guattari call ‘de- territ ori al iz a tion’ (leading 
to what would be unex pec ted, because 
chan ging the allow able patterns of the 
game) and ‘re- territ ori al iz a tion’ (settling 
back into an old game, or setting forth the 
poten tials of the new game) ( Massumi 
2002 : 71-80). 
 Political aﬀ ect is the feeling for this 
vari ation; it is the intens ive as opening up 
access to the virtual, to the diﬀ er en tial 
ﬁ eld, idea, or multi pli city of the situ ation. 
As Massumi puts it: ‘Aﬀ ect is the virtual 
as point of view, provided the visual meta-
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
expres sion of the gendered, and racially and 
geograph ic ally groun ded infra struc tures, 
rare- mater i als and subjectiv it ies at work on 
the inter net ( Nakamura and Chow-White 
2012 ;  Sanderson 2013 ). Th us, crit ical atten-
tion to all these factors brings to the fore the 
attend ant radical redeﬁ n i tion of the geo- 
polit ics ( Bratton 2016 ) and the econom ies 
that sustain and struc ture them. Th is 
ongoing ‘cultural condi tion’ tessel lates with 
historic models of the posthu man, which 
stressed theor ies of embod i ment so as to 
counter the growing abstrac tion of inform-
a tion ( Hayles 1999 ). It also contains, 
however, import ant implic a tions for recent 
theor iz a tions of a post- anthro po centric 
sens ib il ity and the neces sity of an evol u tion 
of ethical aware ness under advanced capit-
al ism (Braidotti 2011a). 
 Since the early millen nium, artists asso-
ci ated with Post Internet engaged in a 
partially 
coher ent, 
oft en 
frag ment ary 
artistic dialogue that examined, appro pri-
ated, re- performed and re- distrib uted the 
images and objects of social media, advert-
ising and corpor ate culture: oft en through 
the plat form- speciﬁ c spaces and communit-
ies (on Tumblr for example) it took to be its 
subjects. Th is Post Internet approach was 
char ac ter ized by a focus on ques tions about 
the construc tion of subjectiv ity; the 
perform ance of (multiple) iden tit ies online; 
the corpor at iz a tion of the inter net; the 
repro duc tion of labour in the digital 
economy; its rela tion ship to emer gent 
forms of mater i al ism, image circu la tion; 
and theor ies of local ity, nation al ity and 
geographic drift . Distinguishing itself from 
earlier subvers ive concepts such as ‘cyber-
space’, ‘the virtual’ or ‘Net art’ (though these 
distinc tions have, of course, always been 
contested), a relat ively closed network of 
parti cipants worked trans vers ally across 
what was known as ‘online’ and ‘oﬄ  ine’. 
From docu ment a tion (in place of the ‘actual’ 
artwork), to the use of shared, low- cost or 
giving new options to the system. Finally, 
and quite simply, adopt ing a direc tion for 
action is actu al iz a tion, the selec tion of a 
path from the options laid out by signi ﬁ c a-
tion; such a decision is modelled as falling 
into a basin of attrac tion. 
 See also Bodies Politic; Aﬀ ective Turn; 
Networked Aﬀ ect; Insurgent Posthumanism; 
Precognition. 
 John Protevi 
 POST INTERNET  
 And the Space Formerly Known 
as Offl ine 
 Post Internet incor por ates many histor ies, 
but the term ﬁ rst emerged around 2008 
(Olson (2006) in  Connor 2013 ), to describe 
a discrete, crit ical artistic enquiry into the 
‘impacts of the Internet on culture at large’ 
( Olsen 2008 ). Th e prac tice began through 
the sharing, re- working, produc tion and 
display of the images, text, activ it ies and 
econom ies 
that 
were 
found 
online. 
Subsequently, follow ing the partic u lar it ies 
of a highly hetero gen eous set of art prac-
tices – from the sculp tural theatres of Ryan 
Trecartin to the image networks of Kari 
Altman to the mutated corpor at ism of 
Timur Si-Qin (for instance) – the term has 
become more nebu lous, refer ring adject-
ively to a broad ‘cultural condi tion’ ( Archey 
2012 ). Understood in art through the exper-
i ence and appear ances of the user- focused 
inter faces of Web 2.0, these crit ical artistic 
enquir ies showed the inter net to be far from 
an autonom ous site of user- agency. Th e 
term’s usage as a ‘cultural condi tion’ indic-
ates how the surface layer is increas ingly 
seen through the non- linear and protocol- 
deﬁ ned set of rela tions and aﬀ ects ( Galloway 
and Th acker 2007 ). Th ese are in turn the
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POST INTERNET 
Internet with the social, as the social. 
Th rough mobile, Wi-Fi and cloud comput-
ing, the processes of sensory embod i ment 
(how these tech no lo gies help users exper i-
ence their envir on ment) erase previ ous 
distinc tions such as those between produ-
cer, consumer and distrib utor ( Farman 
2012 ;  Hu 2015 ;  Easterling 2014 ) – blur ring 
these into the increas ingly homo lin gual 
ﬁ gure of the user ( Wright 2013 ): a user 
who, as bots, the inter net of things, and 
compos ite Post Internet artworks attest 
to, is no longer neces sar ily human. Th is 
rebirth as a condi tion deﬁ nes a quant it at-
ive shift  in the onto lo gical treat ment of 
digital-non- digital tech no lo gical hybrids 
on both sides of the posthu man ambi val-
ence. Th is includes inter leav ing with, and 
de- cent ring, diﬀ er ence through connec-
tions to previ ously out of reach global 
other ness on the one hand ( Nakamura 
and Chow-White 2012 ), and the use and 
repro duc tion of domin ant, stand ard ized 
distri bu tion, produc tion plat forms and 
proto cols which redeﬁ ne much of the space 
formerly known as oﬄ  ine ( Galloway and 
Th acker 2007 ;  Abreu 2015 ), on the other. 
 Th e term Post Internet’s gener a tional 
speciﬁ city and genesis among the insti tu-
tions of art ( Archey 2012 ) remains 
nonethe less 
of 
great 
import ance. 
Condensing varied prac tices into a discrete 
move ment ( Vickers 2013 ;  Chan 2014 ), Post 
Internet art came to be criti cized for its 
appar ent compli city with a glob al ized art 
market, and inab il ity to negate the priv ilege 
of the gallery ( Vickers 2013 ;  Droitcour 
2014a ,  2014b ; Vickers in  Scrimgeour 
2014 );  1 and ulti mately for being unable to 
separ ate itself from the discurs ive and 
struc tural priv ileges (leisure- time, master’s- 
level art educa tion and access to expens ive 
tech no lo gies) it oft en relied on (resist ances 
to these priv ileges and struc tural condi-
tions notwith stand ing) ( Quaintance 2015 ; 
‘poor’ images ( Steyerl 2009 ,  2012 ), to 
networks or systems of art- making that 
neces sar ily comprise both online and 
oﬄ  ine elements (Vickers in  Scrimgeour 
2014 ), what is central to Post Internet art’s 
initial assembly of deﬁ n able works was its 
chal lenge to the estab lished cannons of art, 
inter net discourse and, crucially, to the 
primacy of the phys ical gallery space and 
original artwork ( Vierkant 2010 ). In part, 
eliding distinc tions between real and virtual 
reclaimed the form a tion of subjectiv ity 
from the sort of Cartesian dualism that had 
separ ated the mind from ‘meat space’ (as in 
John Perry Barlow’s ‘Declaration of the 
Independence of Cyberspace’ ( 1996 ;  Berry 
1998 ), but it also posed the embed ding of 
the inter net in the every day as a given 
( Novitskova 2010 ;  McHugh 2011 ). 
 While a diﬀ er ence in degree – being 
on/oﬄ  ine – consti tuted the core diﬀ er ence 
in kind for Post Internet art, the Internet 
has by now become so dissol ute, more 
cloud than web, that it dissolves any partic-
u lar trac tion or rupture that the notion of 
Post the inter net once may have had. As 
artist Jesse Darling put it, ‘every artist 
working today is a Post Internet artist’ 
( 2014 ). Further, the ﬂ uid and evasive 
techno- polit ics of the inter net, meshing 
war and surveil lance with the tech no lo gies 
of vision and image ( Braidotti 2013 : 8; 
 Schuppli 2014a ;  Steyerl 2009 ,  2012 ), and 
the hybrid sover eignty of data, users and 
their parti cip a tion with the ‘necro pol itcs of 
the cloud’ (Hu 2015), can be said to have 
been eclipsed by Post Internet art in a 
machinic- social continuum that bends 
Post Internet around the posthu man 
condi tion. 
Uneven, 
yet 
ideo lo gic ally 
univer sal connec tions between devices, 
social media proﬁ les, (in/non/human) 
users and concep tu ally integ rated stacks of 
inter faces, proto cols and archi tec tures 
( Srnicek 2012 ;  Galloway 2012 ;  Bratton 
2016 ) 
come 
together 
to 
diver sify,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
tion, re- circu la tion and perform ance, 
which produce the gener at ive events of 
inform a tion – do not separ ate it from an 
economy in which the circu la tion and 
regu la tion of new inform a tion is control 
( Dean 2005 ;  Malik 2014 ), but rather bring 
contem por ary art closer to it. 
 Th e prox im ity of Post Internet art to 
Web 2.0 had enabled it to proceed with the 
author ity of speak ing from, and not for the 
inter net; and as a condi tion Post Internet 
has come to be increas ingly suggest ive of 
the over lap ping entan gle ments of state, 
post- state and tech no lo gical inter faces with 
the ﬁ gures of the non/in/post/human. Yet 
as fewer artists mobil ized the term as a 
point of refer ence, and Post Internet started 
taking on more of contem por ary art’s post-
mod ern char ac ter ist ics and phys ic al ity 
( Archey 2012 ), things changed. Indicated 
by a sort of ‘torsion’ occur ring at the heart 
of Post Internet art, the Post Internet as 
condi tion could be said to re- shape itself – 
Janus- like – as a chal lenge to a liberal, 
autonom ously groun ded present a tion of 
the posthu man condi tion. Th is brief (and 
partial) look at Post Internet art, and the 
ﬂ ows of inform a tion it sought to repres ent 
and (in varying degrees) to resist ( Kinsey 
2014 ), there fore allow us to identify three 
contra dic tions that struc ture the messy 
prox im ity to and compli city of Post Internet 
with the posthu man as networked predic a-
ment. Th e ﬁ rst is the impli cit and delib er ate 
failure to disas so ci ate itself from the struc-
tural condi tions that enable it; the second is 
the devel op ment of an aesthetic style that 
char ac ter ized this condi tion as given; and 
the third is the synthesis of Post Internet 
with a wider malaise of contem por ary art 
( Malik 2015 ), which equates the market 
with inform a tion that is, if not entirely 
freed from, at least not completely ﬁ xed to 
bodies. 
 Th e extent to which Post Internet art 
remains situ ated at the struc tural and 
 Chan 2014 ). Yet, artic u lated in the aft er-
math of the ﬁ nan cial crisis of 2008 the 
bifurc a tion of Post Internet art as cultural 
condi tion became paired with the gener at-
ive eﬀ ects of the same inform a tion that 
sparked that crisis in the ﬁ rst place. Th is 
situ ation speaks of an entan gle ment that 
goes beyond the capa city of Post Internet 
art to remain autonom ous. 
 As Suhail Malik has argued, systems 
such as compu ta tional ﬁ nance, contem-
por ary art – and I would add social media 
and Post Internet art – are compar able 
insofar as they oper a tion al ize a notion of 
inform a tion as an event – one that updates 
what was ‘known’ before it (Chun 2011a), 
what cyber net i cist Gregory Bateson would 
call a ‘diﬀ er ence which makes a diﬀ er ence’ 
( Malik 2014 ). No longer ﬁ xed to the 
aggreg a tion of know ledge, here addi tional 
inform a tion instead updates the current 
picture, render ing the exist ing one redund-
ant and useless. In contem por ary art 
produ cing 
such 
diﬀ er ence 
plur al izes 
history or the social – convert ing them 
into subject ively and exper i en tially diﬀ er-
ent events (views) or objects (artworks). 
While in contem por ary art this diﬀ er ence 
might aim to punc ture the hege mony of 
the canons, insti tu tions and narrat ives of 
(west ern ized) modern ity that preceded 
and haunted it, it also more gener ally 
creates a risk that can be gambled against 
( Malik 2014 ). Whether we take the ﬁ nance 
industry – or for instance the spec u lat ive 
plan ning and rhet oric of health, economic 
or migra tion policy ( Mitropoulos 2012 ) – 
the scope, scale, gran u lar ity, social or polit-
ical weight (etc.) of the disrupt ive event of 
inform a tion made possible by the distrib-
uted compu ta tional infra struc tures of the 
Post Internet condi tion, has conver ted this 
very event into a struc tural rela tion in 
itself ( Wark 2015a ). Th us in this sense, 
the essen tially post mod ern strategies of 
contem por ary art – appro pri ation, repe ti-
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTANIMALISM 
which de- centred narrat ives, know ledges, 
languages and subjectiv it ies are brought 
into dialogue with each other so as to redis-
trib ute and destabil ize the narrow and 
recurs ive origin- narrat ives ( Haraway 1986 ) 
and the economic para met ers implied by 
the false unity of being post the Internet.  3   
 See 
also 
Art; 
Capitalocene 
and 
Chthulucene; 
Hypersocial; 
Metadata 
Society; 
Metamodernism; 
Networked 
Aﬀ ect.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
of think ing man, animal, and above all 
their rela tion ship. 
 Believing that the animal essen tially 
exists as a series of mech an ical proced ures 
that in their togeth er ness create a type of 
beha viour (see also  Technoanimalism ), 
Descartes opposed the domin ant ideas on 
the animal of Antiquity, yet at the same 
time built upon a long tradi tion that more 
or less started with Plato’s idea that man is a 
super ior animal, with the import ant addi-
tion that the human superi or ity, as we ﬁ nd 
it in Platonism and espe cially in Christianity, 
turns into a human excep tion al ism with 
Descartes. Th ink of the earli est Apologists 
(around  AD 300) and the Church fathers 
that followed, many of whom at least anti-
cip ated a dualism in which the animal 
turned into a (human) myth since animals 
did not have a direct recog ni tion of God, 
as humans did ( Simondon 2004 : 66). 
Interestingly enough, this form of human/
Humanist excep tion al ism did not exist in 
Presocratic thought, and when Simondon 
talks of Antiquity he partic u larly draws our 
atten tion to Presocratic thinkers like 
Pythagoras and Empedocles, who work 
with the ancient doctrine of metem psy-
chosis, which claims that the soul is not 
so much attached to matter, but rather 
traverses it, ‘lives it’ and moves on. 
Empedocles beau ti fully captures this idea 
with the phrase: ‘I was in other times a boy 
and a girl, a bush and a bird, a silent ﬁ sh in 
the sea’ ( Simondon 2004 : 33, note 2). 
 As early as Lucretius (in his epic  de 
Rerum Natura written in the ﬁ rst century 
aft er Christ) Pythagorean Metempsychosis 
is severely critiqued and replaced with an 
idea that all souls are as mortal as those 
bodies that give rise to them (an idea that 
only returned to academia aft er the 
Renaissance – when his text was redis-
covered – and lived on in the writ ings of 
Montaigne, 
Shakespeare, 
Bruno 
and 
reality and animal reality are in continu ity. 
Descartes aﬃ  rms they are not in continu-
ity. Finally, the contem por ary thesis once 
again reaﬃ  rms they are in continu ity, not 
merely by the reversal of Cartesianism, 
but in saying what is true about the animal 
and what is true about man.  
 2004: 59 
 It is remark able that Simondon, in two 
classes he gave as part of a general intro-
duc tion to psycho logy – he oﬀ ered this to 
(ﬁ rst year!) students until 1967 – gives us 
an over view of the Grand History of what 
we call Animal Studies today, where the 
last phase he distin guishes, the phase in 
which the animal is released from (or 
eman cip ated from) its anthro po centric 
rule, marks the way in which animal 
studies so vividly enters all parts of the 
human it ies at the start of the twenty- ﬁ rst 
century. Or to phrase this diﬀ er ently: what 
is true for man today exceeds our modern 
idea of the human whereas what is true for 
the animal, maybe even more urgently, 
exceeds the idea of the animal as it has 
been domin ated, domest ic ated ( d’homme -
estic ated, as Lacan would put it) by modern 
man. Cartesianism had been domin ant in 
think ing the animal during the nine teenth 
and twen ti eth century through this very 
simple formula: the animal is part of the 
 res extensa  (corpor eal substance) whereas 
man’s exist ence (which has ‘doubt’ as 
its essence), can only be deﬁ ned as  res 
cogit ans (mental substance) . Th is dualist 
oppos i tion, which marks what we can refer 
to as Modern think ing, was not of import-
ance in Antiquity and lies at the heart of 
how Animal Studies today is eman cip at ing 
the animal from our anthro po centric 
view point. Simondon’s over view reminds 
us that our posthu man ist endeav ours (see 
 Posthumanism ) must always already be 
accom pan ied by a postan im al ism, as only 
together – in continu ity with one another 
– can these new areas of thought release us
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTANIMALISM 
vital ist) tradi tions (rarely discussed in the 
Christian and modern liter at ure on the 
animal), appear to have long and fascin at-
ing histor ies. Th e prac tice of ‘mumming’, for 
instance, coming from the Greek  mummo 
(denot ing a child’s bugbear, or a fright en ing 
mask), was a folk tradi tion absorbed in 
Italian masquer ade (and hence in other 
courtly enter tain ment known as masque) 
from the sixteenth century, but has a much 
longer history (stretch ing out until today) 
outside 
of 
Christian 
High 
Culture. 
Originally, mummers were bands of masked 
persons who during winter fest ivals in 
Europe paraded the streets and entered 
houses to dance or play dice in silence. 
 In relat ively new ﬁ elds like Nordic 
Studies, there is partic u lar interest in how 
local tradi tions and customs survived at the 
margins of Christianity, in partic u lar on 
those remote islands where the  res extensa 
of myth o logy and magic was less under 
pres sure. Terry Gunnell stresses the import-
ance of mumming in these communit ies, as 
it stressed the powers of the seasons, of the 
envir on ment (the sea espe cially), reveal ing 
them what Muensterberger famously called 
their ‘semi- human reality’ ( Gunnell 2007 : 
28). Th e extens ive use of masks, of cross- 
dress ing, in many ways prac tices an idea of 
human ity that is far from modern, that 
does not posi tion itself as opposed to the 
animal and to the world but that seems to 
be in search for situ at ing a series of bonds, 
knots and connec tions between all of the 
things that matter in the here and now. 
 As one of the core founders and part of 
the curat orial team I’ve set up the  Papay 
Gyro Nights Art Festival (co- founded and co- 
curated with Ivanov), organ ized every year 
in the heart of the dark and cold winter on 
the remote island of Papa Westray (locally 
known as Papay), in the far north of 
Scotland. Th e aim of this fest ival was to 
create a stage where this discov ery and 
redis cov ery of the strong postan imal and 
Spinoza). Th e domin a tion of Christianity 
(tran scend ental Platonism) and Cartesian 
dualism, however, made sure that the 
animal only up until very recently received 
serious atten tion from the History of 
Th ought. Metempsychosis itself only knew 
a short revival in nine teenth century (it has 
been discussed in the writ ings of Melville, 
Joyce, Pynchon and Proust, among others), 
where it was exper i mented with but more 
oft en ridiculed. 
 Simondon is right when he uses 
dialectics to analyse this history of man and 
animal, but contrary to the tradi tional 
Hegelian use of the term (dialectics), which 
is concerned with a posit ive devel op ment, a 
more frag men ted dialect ical analysis would 
make more sense. And this espe cially 
concerns the synthetic posi tion which, as 
Simondon himself noted above, cannot be 
seen as a grand conclu sion, but concerns 
a much more modest search for the possi -
b il it ies of animal (and human) life. Th us, 
like posthu man ist theor ies of today, post -
an im al ism too has a spec u lat ive nature. 
 For postan im al ism this means that 
think ing in terms of ‘kinds’ and of qual it ies 
ascribed to these kinds, is long left  behind. 
Th us, postan im al ism is in partic u lar 
concerned with the revital iz a tion of the 
long history of human- and-animal/animal- 
and-human rela tion ships as it has been 
developed in the minor  non-Christian 
histor ies (and folk tales), that have survived 
modern ity, as they had survived Christianity. 
Rediscovering these strong but oft en 
neglected tradi tions in the reality of today, 
and thus rewrit ing them into the Grand 
History that had no place for them before, 
the micro pol it ics of postan im al ism doesn’t 
synthes ize the History of Man and Animal 
at all; it excav ates it, hollows it out, repla cing 
Major History with a series of situ ated 
narrat ives. 
 It is inter est ing to ﬁ nd out that quite a 
few of these non-Christian (pagan, animist,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
(perform ance art, cinema, install a tion) 
that real izes a site- speciﬁ c think ing, creat-
ively putting the rela tions between post -
hu man, postan imal and perhaps even 
post- envir on mental entit ies at stake. What 
they synthes ize, to come back to Simondon 
again, is then not so much the History of 
the Animal or of the Human. On the 
contrary, what this real izes is a multi pli city 
of minor histor ies, coming to us (through 
spec u la tion) from the future, from an 
animal, a human and an earth that is not 
here yet. And thus these fest ivals have a 
very strong and power ful polit ical message 
that extends well beyond the doctrine of 
metem psy chosis; they situate what it is like 
to be a boy and a girl, a bush and a bird, a 
silent ﬁ sh in the sea, in the here and now. 1 
 See also Animal; Animacies; Animism 
(Limulus); Bios; Food; Technoanimalism. 
 Note 
 1. Th e author acknow ledges the assist ance 
of Ivanov, Director of the Papay Gyro 
Nights Art Festival. 
 Tsz Man Chan  
 POSTDISCIPLINARITY  
 While the concepts of multi- and inter dis-
cip lin ar ity are oft en used to signify cross- 
discip lin ary activ it ies that thrive even in 
univer sit ies with discip lin ary hege mon ies, 
postdis cip lin ar ity implies more radical 
trans form a tions of current know ledge 
produc tion. Multi- and inter dis cip lin ar ity 
signi ﬁ es collab or a tions across discip lines 
on prob lems or issues of common concern, 
basic ally addressed by theor et ical and 
meth od o lo gical 
approaches, 
developed 
within the frame work of discip lines which 
enter into new syner getic rela tion ships 
posthu man ( id est , post-Cartesian) revival in 
the contem por ary arts and in thought, could 
be exper i enced/exper i mented with. Th e 
name of the fest ival captures these interests: 
Gyro (aka  Grýla and  grýlur ) – is the name of 
a threat en ing female orgress ﬁ gure; a giant-
ess, who is well known through out the 
region. Th e Gyro is a mumming ﬁ gure that 
during winter time comes from the sea, is 
dressed in seaweed and demands oﬀ er ings 
(food but also little chil dren) before she 
returns to the sea again. Known under 
diﬀ er ent names through out the North 
Atlantic (from the Orkney Islands to the 
Shetland Islands, the Faroe Islands and 
Iceland), the Gyro also appears in many 
diﬀ er ent forms. In our days the Gyro lives on 
the island again when Hong Kong’s well- 
known perform ance artist Frog King roams 
the island in his  objet trouvé coat (with 
froggy eyes). Famous for his solo exhib i tion 
at the 2011 Venice Biennale (entitled 
 Frogtopia, Hong-Kornucopia ) where one 
pavil ion contained over nine million of his 
artworks, his un- human perform ance was 
all about litter ing the island, and the capit al-
ist and human ist senti ments that rule it, with 
an over whelm ing earthly wit. But the Gyro 
also returns in the sound art install a tions of 
Signe Lidén (played by the strong winds that 
always haunt the island), in the cine matic 
chaos motic reﬂ ec tions (of the north ern 
light) by Japanese avant- garde ﬁ lm- maker 
Takashi Makino and in the ancient folk tales 
that for instance tell us about the love of 
selkies for the girls of the island (as told by 
Orkney storyteller Tom Muir). 
 Asking ourselves what forms of life the 
island (and the sea), at full moon in 
February, allows for, what kind of new 
creatures it creates, is at the core of what 
this fest ival (and many other small cultural 
fest ivals that are increas ingly popular in 
the art worlds today). It is espe cially about 
the bring ing together of local storytellers, 
archae olo gists, philo soph ers and artists
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTDISCIPLINARITY 
of trans versal conver sa tions and trans gres-
sions of current academic bound ar ies 
between produc tion of know ledge on the 
‘human’, the ‘social’, the ‘natural’, the ‘tech-
nical’ and the ‘medical’ worlds. 
 Postdisciplinary 
trans gres sions 
of 
human it ies and natural sciences are for 
example a meth od o lo gical corol lary, when 
Karen Barad ( 2007 ) argues for entan gle-
ments 
of 
space–time- matter ing 
and 
meaning making, when Donna Haraway 
( 2008 ) encour ages us to look at nature cul-
tures, when Rosi Braidotti ( 2006a ) calls for 
an ethics founded in the inhuman dynam ics 
of zoe, or when Stacy Alaimo ( Alaimo and 
Hekman 2008 ) draws atten tion to the 
transcor por eal. Scholars of soma t ech nics 
( Sullivan and Murray 2009 ) explore how the 
somat ical and the tech nical are implic ated 
in each other, while science and tech -
no logy studies schol ars invest ig ate mater ial- 
semi otic co- construc tions ( Haraway 1992a ). 
Th ese are examples among many. Th ey 
illus trate how posthu man ist concep tual 
frame works make postdis cip lin ary trans-
gres sions of discip lin ary bound ar ies neces-
sary. None of the issues addressed here can 
be contained within concep tual bound ar ies 
that separ ate the ‘human’ and ‘social’ from 
the ‘natural’, ‘medical’ and ‘tech nical’ world. 
 Postdisciplinarity requires new modes 
of organ iz ing as well as new meth od o lo-
gical tools. Transgressive and trans form at-
ive meth od o lo gical frame works are not 
created out of nothing. Th ey need to unfold 
in trans versal conver sa tions between diﬀ er-
ent approaches to matters of common 
concern, deﬁ ned through what Barad 
concep tu al izes as provi sional and moment-
ary – non- univer sal – cuts between subject 
and object ( Barad 2007 ). To estab lish such 
trans versal conver sa tions beyond discip lin-
ary bound ar ies, postdis cip lin ary collab or-
at ive spaces are needed, i.e. spaces where 
collab or at ive eﬀ orts between diﬀ er ently 
situ ated research ers can unfold without any 
with each other. However, in multi- and 
inter dis cip lin ary know ledge produc tion, 
the discip lines perform as prerequis ites and 
taken- for-granted points of depar ture for 
the cross- discip lin ary work. By contrast, the 
concept, postdis cip lin ar ity, refers to more 
trans gress ive ways of produ cing academic 
know ledge which destabil ize, decon struct 
and disrupt the hege mony of distinct 
discip lines and the classic academic divides 
between human, social, tech nical, medical 
and natural sciences. Scholars gath er ing 
under the banner of posthu man it ies, enga-
ging with the ﬁ gur a tions of the posthu man, 
defend diﬀ er ent kinds of postdis cip lin ar ity, 
oft en times also reﬂ ec ted under the umbrella 
term trans dis cip lin ar ity. 
 Scholars 
of 
posthu man it ies 
have 
academic traject or ies in a diversity of 
discip lines as well as inter dis cip lines or 
‘studies’ such as for example femin ist 
studies, post co lo nial studies, queer studies, 
crit ical dis/ability studies, science and 
tech no logy studies, envir on mental studies, 
cultural studies, animal studies etc. But 
across this diversity, shared grounds are 
oft en found in disid en ti ﬁ c at ory rela tions 
to the discip lin ing forces of the classic 
academic divides and the comparte ment-
al iz a tion of know ledge produc tion into 
distinct discip lines, each holding on to 
their canons. Most schol ars of posthu man-
it ies today have to recog nize their points of 
depar ture in discip lines or inter dis cip lines 
as far as formal creden tials in terms of 
degrees and aﬃ  l i ations are concerned. But 
still they tend oft en to disid entify with the 
main stream of their discip lines or inter dis-
cip lines due to crit ical stances vis-à- vis the 
onto- epistem o lo gies, on which the discip-
lin ing and compart ment al iz ing dynam ics 
of modern academic know ledge produc-
tion are commonly founded. Many of 
these schol ars criti cize the academic 
divides and discip lin ary struc tures as inap-
pro pri ate compart ment al iz a tions in favour
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
produc tion of the phenom ena under scru-
tiny as well as the poten tial inter fer ence 
patterns, trans form a tions and possib il it ies 
for mutu ally troub ling or enrich ing onto lo-
giz ing gestures and world ing prac tices of 
these perform at ive appar ati are taken into 
account. It should be noticed that diﬀ ract-
ive read ings are not to be collapsed with 
read ings creat ing a Hegelian synthesis from 
binary oppos i tions. Th e purpose is neither 
to iron out diﬀ er ences, troub ling clashes or 
tensions between theor et ical stances and 
world ing prac tices, nor to end up in a stale-
mate between oppos ing binary claims, 
compet ing for a hege monic posi tion in the 
analysis. Th e point is to under take well- 
prepared moves beyond the comfort zones 
of diﬀ er ing theor et ical stances, and to bring 
these stances into product ive, mutu ally 
enrich ing and open- ended and world- 
making conver sa tions. 
 Other examples of think ing tech no lo-
gies, used by posthu man ist schol ars, to 
estab lish postdis cip lin ary conver sa tions 
which blur, disrupt and decon struct discip-
lin ary bound ar ies and hege mon ies are 
meth od o lo gies, conceived along the lines 
of Deleuzian philo sophy such as nomad-
ism 
and 
rhizo mat ics. 
Methodological 
consequences 
of 
nomadic 
rhizo matic 
approaches are for example carved out by 
Rosi Braidotti, who under lines the import-
ance of analyt ic ally ‘going in between diﬀ er-
ent discurs ive ﬁ elds, passing through diverse 
spheres of intel lec tual discourse’ and be 
aware of how ‘theory today happens “in 
transit”, moving on, passing through, creat-
ing connec tions where things were previ-
ously discon nec ted or seemed unre lated, 
where there seemed to be “nothing else to 
see” ’ (2002: 173). Brought to bear on postdis-
cip lin ary work, this pinpoint ing of transit 
and move ment can be read as an encour-
age ment never to rest in a discip lin ary 
comfort zone. As discussed by Rebecca 
Coleman and Jessica Ringrose ( 2013 ), this 
discip line having an exclus ive, taken- for-
granted right to set the academic agenda 
and police the borders of the speciﬁ c kinds 
of know ledge produc tion to be set in 
motion. Collaboration is import ant in 
postdis cip lin ary work, since all know ledge 
produc tion is considered partial, and no 
one there fore can have a full over view, i.e. 
play ‘the godtrick’ ( Haraway 1991 : 191). 
 Conceptual tools which can perform as 
helpful think ing tech no lo gies in terms of 
estab lish ing trans versal postdis cip lin ary 
conver sa tions have been developed by 
diﬀ er ent schol ars of posthu man it ies. An 
example is Haraway’s and Barad’s sugges-
tions about using the optical phenomenon 
of diﬀ rac tion as a meta phor for a crit ical 
think ing tech no logy, which makes up an 
altern at ive to the more conven tional meta-
phor of reﬂ ec tion. A reﬂ ex ive meth od o-
logy uses the mirror as a crit ical tool, 
Haraway
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTDISCIPLINARITY 
work beyond them. I have also sugges ted 
a distinc tion between post- and trans dis-
cip lin ar ity ( Lykke 2010 ,  2011 ), based on 
the ways in which the two terms have been 
used in some schol arly contexts. While 
trans dis cip lin ar ity oft en signi ﬁ es modes 
of working with know ledge produc tion, 
postdis cip lin ar ity more oft en refers to 
modes of organ iz ing this produc tion. 
Sue-Ellen Case provides an example here, 
when she uses the notion of postdis cip lin-
ar ity to suggest ‘that the organ iz ing struc-
tures of discip lines them selves will not 
hold’ (Case 2001: 150), compar ing the 
discip line- disrupt ive poten tials of inter-
sec tions of femin ist theory and perform-
ance studies. 
 See also Diﬀ raction; Feminist Post-
humanities; In/human; Naturecultures. 
 Nina Lykke 
approach is more and more being taken to 
bear on empir ical research, includ ing social 
research. Here it implies that concep tual 
frame works should not be applied as discip-
lin ar ily canon ized grids to be imposed on 
the mater ial. While meth od o lo gies are 
considered as perform at ive and world-
making ( Coleman and Ringrose 2013 : 1), 
the mater ial should be approached in such 
open- ended ways that what Deleuze calls 
‘non- preex ist ent concepts’ ( Deleuze 1987 : 
vii) can be extrac ted from it ( Coleman and 
Ringrose 2013 : 10). 
 In terms of concep tual gene a lo gies, 
postdis cip lin ar ity has been less commonly 
used than trans dis cip lin ar ity. However, 
some femin ist schol ars have, for example, 
found it appro pri ate to signify a wished- 
for trans form a tion of the discip lin ary 
univer sity with the concept of postdis cip-
lin ar ity. I have argued for femin ist studies 
as a post- discip line due to its radical claims 
to decon struct all discip lin ary canons 
 Thoughts recon fi g ure to engage the chan ging ecology. 
Subatlantic, Ursula Biemann, 2015, video still
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 She makes eﬀ orts to attune her eyes 
to 
see 
under wa ter 
and 
fuse 
with 
the swarm ing Sea where the tiniest of 
microbes operate on an inter- oceanic 
scale. 
 (1) Th e science ﬁ ctional video narra tion 
of  Subatlantic (2015) follows a she- scient-
ist who is making instru mental obser va-
tions about a chan ging envir on ment 
around the time of the last glacial 
melts 12,000 years ago, when the oceans 
rose 100 meters, through to the present 
thawing of the Greenland ice sheets. 
Th e scientiﬁ c ﬁ gure inhab its multiple 
tempor al it ies 
span ning 
across 
eons. 
Spoken oﬀ - camera from a sub-Atlantic 
posi tion, the post- glacial, pre- modern 
narrat ive unfolds across the Subatlantic, 
the latest climatic phase of the Holocene 
we are currently exper i en cing. Th e 
posthu man condi tion recon nects us to 
inﬁ n itely larger, untame able forces that 
animate 
extra- histor ical 
dimen sions, 
plunging us humans into deep time where 
we have to index ourselves anew. 
 POSTGLACIAL  
 Annotated video script of 
 Subatlantic 
 Westerly winds determ ine the climate on 
the Island. Fog seeps into the mind’s corridors 
and the sea enters every ﬁ ssure. She is in 
charge of meas ur ing ﬂ uc tu ations and send-
ing the data to the lab on the coast. Logging 
the freez ing and melting, she minutely 
records her encoun ters with diﬀ er ence. All 
seems to follow a dynamic order: Th e winds, 
the streams, the birds, the sky. 
 Th e faint ness of change made it hard to 
detect, but the rocks witnessed a steady 
rise of the Sea until one day all tech nical 
equip ment had to be moved further inland. 
Th e coast sank into the Ocean for a thou-
sand years. Th e lab now lies submerged at 
the bottom a hundred yards deep, together 
with other dwell ings of the Islanders. To do 
her science, she had to become a diver, 
meas ur ing a sinking contract ing world. 
Only the Oceans are expand ing. 
 Underwater passages accu mu late imper sonal intel li gence. 
Subatlantic, Ursula Biemann, 2015, video still
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTGLACIAL 
swirl ing east ward and upward. Th e warm 
streams plunge Northern Europe into mild 
winters. Reaching the Arctic Sea, the dense 
salty water sinks to the deep- ocean ﬂ oor 
where it ﬂ ows back to trop ical regions. Th is 
process anim ates the global Ocean streams. 
Circulation is dense in the submar ine 
rivers, and thick with nutri ents. 
 Th e massive inﬂ ux of arctic melt water 
dilutes the salin ity and impedes the sink to 
the Sea ﬂ oor. First, the Ocean streams will 
slow down before they stop alto gether. Will 
England’s climate resemble Labrador’s? 
Th ere is ques tion ing in the water. 
 (2) Widely dispersed loca tions ﬁ lmed on 
the Shetland Islands, Greenland’s Disco 
Bay and a tiny Caribbean Island are 
connec ted through the invis ible Ocean 
streams, which determ ine the temper a -
t ures in the North Atlantic, sea and land. 
Th e magnitude and sens it ive correl a tion 
of these plan et ary processes are hard to 
grasp, all the more so as the most signi ﬁ c-
ant processes are occur ring between 
loca tions and invis ible to our eyes. Th ey 
refer ence what Timothy Morton calls 
hyper ob jects – very large diﬀ used objects 
that are perman ently present but not 
local ized in a mater ial sense (global 
warming, ﬁ nan cial markets). Since hyper-
ob jects occur in much vaster tempor al it-
ies, they phase in and out of the shorter 
human time frame of percep tion and 
with draw from our visib il ity. Th ey only 
exist in unpresent able dimen sions, both 
math em at ic ally and alleg or ic ally. And yet 
they urgently need to enter the collect ive 
imagin ary. Th e imagin ary capa city is 
exper i en cing a signi ﬁ c ant expan sion in 
posthu man ism. Along those lines, the 
she- scient ist’s exam in a tion is direc ted not 
only to the phys ical world and atmo-
sphere that is engulﬁ ng her, but also to the 
thoughts that are formed, recon ﬁ gured or 
released under the chan ging condi tions. 
Excursions into the fold of these entangled 
land scapes produces a crit ical loca tion 
that puts thought and imagin a tion in 
move ment. 
Ideas rush by like weather events . 
Subatlantic, Ursula Biemann, 2015, video still
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
solid i ﬁ ed an under stand ing of an abso-
lute, meas ur able mater i al ity. A science of 
the virtual, however, must be a science 
of intens it ies, as prac tised by the she- 
scient ist who explores the quality of 
ener gies, waves, temper at ures and pres-
sures. Th e posthu man condi tion with its 
volat ile atmo spheric climate is no longer 
ﬁ rmly placed in abso lute matter; it ﬂ ows 
along form less virtual planes arising from 
unmeas ur able, exhal able and constantly 
recon ﬁ g ur ing qual it ies. 
 Masses of microor gan isms have been 
trapped in the polar ice sheets for longer 
than human time. Locked in frozen layers, 
a universe of ancient creatures awaits 
another chance at life. Some are 400,000 
years old and still alive. Rumours say they 
have been involved in some lateral trans- 
genetic activ it ies, and are now ﬂ oat ing 
outside of history. 
 From the dissolv ing ices cape, tons of 
microbes make their way back into the 
liquid envir on ment, reshap ing the chem-
istry of the oceans and the atmo sphere. 
Th e melt water bears new genetic mater ial 
 On board  Explorer II she joins the bio- 
prospect ing team in search of marine 
genetic resources. She brings in the direct-
ives for inter- species commu nic a tion. Th e 
International Seabed Authority is keen to 
bring within the Oceanic Constitution any 
new genetic mater i als extrac ted from deep 
below. Particularly these extreme methane- 
eating organ isms. 
 She prac tises a science of intens it ies. 
Out in the weather, she studies the self- 
organ iz ing ﬂ ows of matter and energy and 
the thresholds at which sudden phase 
trans itions occur in phys ical systems, for 
instance from a solid to a liquid state. Th is 
process involves divers, video graph ers and 
meta phys i cians. 
  (3) Here in the vicin ity of Manuel 
DeLanda, the scientiﬁ c analysis of the 
actual and the virtual intro duces us to the 
idea of moving between a multi pli city of 
states that adhere to diﬀ er ent models of 
thought. Whereas the actual is exten ded 
in metric space and linear time, the virtual 
is intens ive and form less. Out of conveni-
ence, science has long focused on and 
 Incubating ideas are fi nally released from the binding force of the pack.  
Subatlantic, Ursula Biemann, 2015, video still
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN CRITICAL THEORY 
Humanist ideal of ‘Man’ as the allegedly 
univer sal measure of all things, whereas the 
latter rests on the rejec tion of species hier-
archy and human excep tion al ism. Th ey are 
equally relev ant discourses, but they refer 
to diﬀ er ent theor et ical and philo soph ical 
gene a lo gies and engender diﬀ er ent polit-
ical stances. Th eir conver gence in posthu-
man crit ical thought produces a chain of 
theor et ical, social and polit ical eﬀ ects that 
is more than the sum of its parts and points 
to a qual it at ive leap in new concep tual 
direc tions ( Braidotti 2013 ). 
 Th e relev ance of posthu man crit ical 
theory is enhanced by the contex tual 
urgency of the Anthropocene condi tion, 
which, read in the light of Felix Guattari’s 
 Th ree Ecologies (2000), becomes an envir-
on mental, social- econom ical, as well as 
aﬀ ect ive and psych ical phenomenon of 
unpre ced en ted propor tions. Th e combin a-
tion of fast tech no lo gical advances on the 
one hand and growing economic and 
social inequal it ies on the other makes for 
a conﬂ ict- ridden land scape marked by 
violent and inhu mane power rela tions. 
 Th ere are many chal lenges for post -
hu man crit ical theory: the ﬁ rst one is to 
acknow ledge that subjectiv ity is not the 
exclus ive prerog at ive of  Anthropos . Th is 
means that it is not linked to tran scen -
d ental reason and that it is unhinged from 
the dialectics of recog ni tion. Secondly, the 
chal lenge is to develop a dynamic and 
sustain able notion of vital ist mater i al ism 
that encom passes non- human agents, 
ranging from plants and animals to tech-
no lo gical arte facts. Th irdly, it means to 
enlarge the frame and scope of ethical 
account ab il ity along the trans versal lines of 
post- anthro po centric rela tions. In other 
words, the chal lenge is to create assemblages 
of human and non- human actors. 
 To meet these mani fold chal lenges 
posthu man crit ical theory draws from 
that the world hasn’t seen. Released from 
the deep- freeze, they begin to assemble 
genetic futures. Apprehension ﬂ ushes into 
the cold water and blends with new matter, 
intensely commu nic at ing with fragile 
marine systems. 
 (4) With the melting of the Arctic ice 
comes the steady release of massive new 
genetic mater i als with which human ity is 
not acquain ted. Th e ice allows microbes 
to enjoy a sort of immor tal ity, allow ing 
creatures that have long disap peared from 
the planet to someday return. With the 
Earth’s sixth mass extinc tion under way, 
the logic of this evol u tion ary strategy 
becomes 
compre hens ible: 
preserving 
genetic blue prints by storing them in 
deep- freeze 
for 
a 
future 
re- entry. 
Evolutionary biolo gists estim ate that the 
total biomass of the microor gan isms in 
and beneath the ice sheet may amount to 
be a thou sand times that of all the humans 
on Earth. To be posthu man increas ingly 
means to relo cate in a new genetic plan et-
ary milieu. Rather spec u lat ive than 
predict ive, the she- scient ist – become 
diver, video grapher and meta phys i cian – 
engages in the inev it able trans form a tion 
of the chem ical and genetic compos i tion 
of the earth by recon ﬁ g ur ing its histor ical 
terms, rework ing its tempi, reset ting its 
land marks, and rerout ing its premises. 
 See also Animism (Limulus); Ecosophy; 
Naturecultures; 
Hypersea; 
Planetary; 
Speculative Posthumanism; Vertigo Sea. 
 Ursula Biemann 
 POSTHUMAN CRITICAL THEORY  
 Posthuman crit ical theory unfolds at the 
inter sec tion between post- human ism on 
the one hand and post- anthro po centrism 
on the other. Th e former proposes the
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
embraces the eco- soph ical co- creation of 
the world – our terrestrial, groun ded loca-
tion – by recog niz ing the speciﬁ c abil it ies 
and capa cit ies of anthro po morphic and 
non- anthro po morphic beings alike. Th e 
expan ded deﬁ n i tion of life also allows for 
the inclu sion of and inter ac tion with tech-
no lo gical arte facts and thus accounts for 
tech no lo gical 
medi ation 
(‘machinic 
autopoiesis’). Th is idea discards the 
nature–culture divide and replaces it with 
a philo sophy of rela tion al ity and multiple 
inter con nec tions. Th e embrace of the tech-
no lo gical realm resists the over- coding of 
tech no logy by the ﬁ nan cial proﬁ t prin-
ciple, which is the axiom of advanced 
capit al ism. 
 If it is a chal lenge to acknow ledge that 
subjectiv ity is not the exclus ive prerog at ive 
of the human, then a posthu man theory of 
the subject emerges as an empir ical project 
of exper i ment ing with what contem por ary, 
bio- tech no lo gic ally medi ated bodies are 
capable of ‘becom ing’. Th e pursuit of one’s 
freedom to become is framed by a neo-
Spinozist ethics of joy or aﬃ  rm a tion, which 
indexes the processes of becom ing onto a 
rela tional bond to a multi pli city of others 
whose 
well- being 
aﬀ ect 
one’s 
own. 
Posthuman crit ical theory supports the 
compos i tion of nomadic subjectiv it ies 
whose rela tional capa cit ies are multi fold 
and 
open 
to 
non- anthro po morphic 
elements. Th e ethics of the posthu man 
subject is  zoe -centred egal it ari an ism , based 
on respect for the non- human, as the vital 
force that cuts across previ ously segreg ated 
species, categor ies and domains. Neo- 
mater i al ist imman ence requires a collab or-
at ive moral ity in the sense of ethical 
account ab il ity for the sustain ab il ity of these 
rela tional assemblages or nomadic compos-
i tions of posthu man subjectiv ity ( Braidotti 
2002 ,  2006a ). Th e non- proﬁ t exper i ments 
with intens ive modes of posthu man 
two
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN CRITICAL THEORY 
 Methodologically, posthu man crit ical 
theory rejects any form of nostal gia for 
human ism, that is to say the vision of the 
human as the enlightened ‘Man of reason’ 
( Lloyd 1984 ). Both in Deleuze’s philo sophy 
and in femin ist epistem o logy, the non- 
nostal gic approach is cultiv ated through the 
method and the pedago gical tactic of anti- 
oedipal de- famil i ar iz a tion. Th is entails un- 
learn ing old habits of thought, and the 
forms of masculin ist and Eurocentric 
repres ent a tions they sustain. Such a meth-
od o lo gical process goes hand-in-hand with 
the analysis of power rela tions, through the 
carto graphic polit ics of loca tion mentioned 
above. Th e point of carto graph ies is to 
account for and learn to relin quish unearned 
priv ileges and impli cit power priv ileges. Th e 
method of dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion from the famil-
iar is one of the most product ive points 
of contact between neo- mater i al ism and 
femin ist theory ( Braidotti 2016a ). Keeping 
ﬁ rmly in mind the nomadic aim of speak ing 
truth to power and of de- territ ori al iz ing 
philo sophy from the despotic machine that 
has coded it over time, posthu man crit ical 
theory emphas izes the import ance of learn-
ing to think diﬀ er ently about what we are in 
the process of becom ing. 
 Th e meta- meth od o lo gical angle is 
crucial to posthu man crit ical theory 
which, being a prac tical philo sophy, pays 
special atten tion to the criteria needed to 
set up exper i ments with both virtual and 
concrete applic a tions. Th e general concepts 
get oper a tion al ized in a series of meth od o-
lo gical guidelines. Th e ﬁ rst guideline is a 
prac tical, problem- oriented approach to 
philo soph ical think ing, which is open to 
non- human agents and factors, includ ing 
tech no lo gical medi ation. Secondly, we 
need non- linear ity or nomadic think ing 
which entails both putting the creat ive 
powers of the imagin a tion to work and 
the 
strategy 
of 
de- famil i ar iz a tion 
( Braidotti 2013 ). Th irdly, a trans- and 
subjectiv ity actu al ize the virtual possib il it-
ies of a nomadic, rela tional self that func-
tions in a nature–culture continuum and is 
tech no lo gic ally medi ated. Not surpris ingly, 
this non- proﬁ t, exper i mental approach to 
diﬀ er ent prac tices of subjectiv ity runs 
against the spirit of contem por ary capit al-
ism, fuelled by a notion of possess ive indi-
vidu al ism based on quant it at ive options 
( Macpherson 1962 ). Th e theory of posthu-
man subjectiv ity runs precisely in the 
oppos ite direc tion towards non- proﬁ t 
exper i ment a tions with intens ity. 
 As a consequence, the task of crit ical 
thought is deﬁ ned as both crit ical and 
creat ive. Th e  crit ical side is oper a tion al ized 
through carto graph ies of the power 
( potestas ) rela tions at work in the produc-
tion of discourses and social prac tices, 
with special emphasis on their eﬀ ects upon 
subject- form a tion. Th e  creat ive side enlists 
the resources of the imagin a tion and 
proposes a new alli ance of critique with 
creativ ity, philo sophy with the arts, for the 
purpose of learn ing to think diﬀ er ently, 
invent ing new concepts and actu al iz ing 
altern at ives to the domin ant human istic 
vision of the subject. 
 Neo- mater i al ist 
nomadic 
thought 
proposes the paral lel ism of philo sophy, art 
and the sciences, by arguing that think ing 
is the coun ter part of the embod ied subject’s 
ability to enter into multiple modes of rela-
tion. ‘Th ought’ is consequently the expres-
sion of onto lo gical rela tion al ity, that is to 
say of the power ( poten tia ) to aﬀ ect and 
be aﬀ ected ( Deleuze and Guattari 1994 ). 
Furthermore, think ing is about the creation 
of new concepts in that it pursues the actu-
al iz a tion of intens ive or virtual rela tions. 
Posthuman crit ical thought can thus be 
under stood as a multi- direc tional philo-
sophy of rela tional ethics. In other words, 
posthu man crit ical theory fore grounds a 
rela tional ethics of joy and a polit ics of 
aﬃ  rm a tion.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 In a recent paper by Goodley, Lawthom 
and Runswick-Cole ( 2014 ) we asked: what 
does it mean to be human in the twenty- 
ﬁ rst century and in what ways does disab il-
ity enhance these mean ings? In address ing 
these ques tions we found ourselves 
working through the entan gle ments of 
nature, society, tech no logy, medi cine, 
biopower and culture, partic u larly inspired 
by Rosi Braidotti’s work on the posthu man 
condi tion ( Braidotti 2003 ,  2006b ,  2013 ). 
But how does disab il ity speak to the 
posthu man (and vice versa)? We under-
stand disab il ity as a polit ical category, an 
iden tity and a moment of rela tional ethics. 
Our community of schol ars and activ ists – 
crit ical disab il ity studies – are, we believe, 
perfectly at ease with the posthu man 
because disab il ity has  always contra vened 
the tradi tional clas sical human ist concep-
tion of what it means to be human (see 
 Goodley, Lawthom and Runswick-Cole 
2014 ). But, we argue, disab il ity also invites 
a crit ical analysis of the posthu man (and 
for that matter human ism). We draw on 
one of Braidotti’s posthu man themes 
developed in her 2013 text:  life beyond the 
self.  We illus trate the ways in which disab il-
ity epitom izes a posthu man enhance ment 
of the self while, simul tan eously, demand-
ing recog ni tion of the self in the human ist 
register. Th is leads us neatly to our recent 
work in which we have started to develop a 
theory of  DisHuman Studies  (see  Goodley 
et  al. 2014 ;  Goodley, Runswick-Cole and 
Liddiard, 2016 ) which, we contend, simul-
tan eously acknow ledges the possib il it ies 
oﬀ ered by disab il ity to trouble, reshape 
and re- fashion the human (crip and 
posthu man ambi tions) while at the same 
time assert ing disabled people’s human ity 
(norm at ive and human istic desires).  
supra- discip lin ary approach to the produc-
tion of know ledge is neces sary. Such an 
approach is nomadic in rela tion to discip-
lin ary power and devoted to exper i ment a-
tion rather than the repe ti tion of tradi tion. 
Fourth comes carto graphic accur acy, with 
the corol lary of ethical account ab il ity. 
Finally, 
posthu man 
crit ical 
theory 
embraces the combin a tion of critique with 
creativ ity, includ ing a ﬂ air for para doxes 
and the recog ni tion of the speciﬁ city of art 
prac tices. 
 Politically speak ing, posthu man crit ical 
theory is a prac tical philo sophy that aims 
at compos ing a ‘missing people’, that is to 
say it creates a plane of encounter for 
subjects who share concerns and desires. 
Critical think ing needs to construct its 
community around the shared aﬀ ects and 
concepts of collect ively drawn carto graph-
ies of power. Th e plane of compos i tion of 
‘we’ – a community of nomadic and 
account able schol ars – consti tutes the 
share able work bench of crit ical posthu man 
schol ars. It expresses the aﬃ  rm at ive, 
ethical dimen sion of becom ing- posthu man 
as a gesture of collect ive self- styling. It 
actu al izes a community that is not bound 
negat ively by shared vulner ab il ity, the guilt 
of ances tral communal viol ence, or the 
melan cho lia of unpay able onto lo gical 
debts, but rather by a collab or at ive ethics 
of becom ing. Posthuman crit ical thinkers 
are bonded by the compas sion ate acknow-
ledg ment 
of 
their 
inter de pend ence 
with multiple, human and non- human, 
others. 
 See also Critical Posthumanism; Anthro-
pocene; Transhumanism/Post humanism; 
Insurgent Posthumanism Feminist Post-
humanities; In- human; the Joy; Monster/
the Unhuman; Neo/New Materialism; 
Process Ontologies. 
 Rosi Braidotti
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN DISABILITY AND DISHUMAN STUDIES 
being of our present ethno- class (i.e. 
Western bour geois) concep tion of the 
human, Man, which over- repres ents itself 
as if it were the human itself, and that of 
secur ing the well- being, and there fore the 
full cognit ive and beha vi oral autonomy of 
the human species itself/ourselves’ (ibid.: 
260). We read Wynter’s response here as 
delib er ately human istic and in concert 
with the new human ism that Frantz Fanon 
( 1993 ) had in mind: an expan sion ist 
reclaim ing of the category of the human. 
A polit ical and prac tical response to this 
over- repres ent a tion has involved excluded 
others of the empir ical human world 
seeking recog ni tion through the norm at ive 
legal frame works that respect the right to 
live as a human being and pan- national 
declar a tions cher ish ing this phenomenon 
called the human. We could cite here, for 
example, the oppor tun it ies for human ist 
recog ni tion oﬀ ered by the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. We agree with Braidotti ( 2013 ) 
that these frame works continue to oﬀ er 
power ful forms of recog ni tion and appar-
atus for agit a tion for many people who 
under stand ably seek to be included in the 
human ist human category. 
 Posthuman analyses appear to inter-
vene in rather diﬀ er ent ways in response to 
the domin ance of human ism. One char ac-
ter trait of posthu man analyses is the 
rejec tion of the human category as an old- 
fash ioned, elitist and narrow phenomenon 
and, in its place, an opening up of new 
forms of subjectiv ity, rela tion al ity and 
social ity asso ci ated, for example, with post-
hu man concep tions such as the cyborg 
(Haraway), rhizomes (Deleuze and Guattari), 
animal- human fusions (Chen), and non- 
human monsters and chimeras (Shildrick). 
Similar responses can be found in the 
disab il ity community. Th e devel op ments of 
crip theory, activ ism, art, community and 
polit ics (see  McRuer 2006 ) celeb rate the 
 Humanism and the Posthuman 
Condition  
 Th e human is a self- aggrand iz ing, abstract 
ideal and symbol of clas sical human ity that 
was born in Europe ‘predic ated on eight-
eenth and nine teenth- century rendi tions 
of 
clas sical 
Antiquity 
and 
Italian 
Renaissance ideals’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 13) and 
shaped, more recently, through modern ist 
and capit al ist mould ings. ‘Humanity’, 
Braidotti
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
the self as an exten ded, distrib uted, inter-
con nec ted and rela tional entity ‘embod ied 
and embed ded’ (ibid.). A posthu man 
subject embraces ‘aﬃ  rm at ive polit ics’ which 
combine ‘critique with creativ ity’ in the 
pursuit of altern at ive ways of living with 
one another (ibid.). Th is notion of the 
exten ded self recalls Braidotti’s ( 2006b ) 
process onto logy. Rather than concep tu al-
iz ing 
onto logy 
as 
an 
intern al ized 
phenomenon of an indi vidual subject, 
we are asked to think of the kinds of con-
nec tion between and within one another 
that create a rela tional onto logy. Such con-
nec tions can be found in the disab il ity 
move ment, where disabled activ ists have 
developed their own disab il ity commu -
nit ies and forms of resist ance that have 
created new posthu man assemblages of 
crip collectiv ity, iden tity and resist ance. 
Similarly, people with the label of intel lec-
tual disab il it ies (who would previ ously 
have been labelled as mentally retarded) 
explode this patho lo gical label through 
their collect ive polit ics of self- advocacy 
that contests their margin al iz a tion and 
prob lem at izes profes sional and insti tu-
tional deﬁ cit know ledge. Th e global self- 
advocacy move ment captures an emer ging 
posthu man assemblage of disab il ity polit ics 
– a polit ical commons that stretches across 
national borders – forming a global multi-
tude ( Hardt and Negri 2000 ,  2004 ). Just as 
the self is exten ded so too the self is desired. 
Th e British organ iz a tion of disabled people 
– Disabled People Against the Cuts ( DPAC ) 
– appeal in their campaigns againt the 
human rights viol a tions of the British 
govern ment’s auster ity policies. Disabled 
activ ists 
have 
funda ment ally 
shift ed, 
shaped and changed the policy land scape 
in the  UK to ensure that anti- discrim in at ory 
legis la tion is in place. Th ese examples of 
activ ism draw upon human ist discourses 
of univer sal rights and self in search of 
recog ni tion. Indeed, think ing back to the 
disrupt ive anti- human ist poten tial of 
disab il ity to create new ways of living, 
loving and labour ing. Disability is recon-
ceived as a place – and a crip space – to 
contem plate the ways in which the human 
being is being reshaped through processes 
of culture, tech no logy, polit ics and glob-
al iz a tion. Disability is a quint es sen tially 
posthu man condi tion because of its crip 
poten tial. 
 It would appear that the polit ics of 
disab il ity enjoys a complex rela tion ship 
with human ism and the posthu man. We 
have come across this tension before. We 
are struck by (and share) the ambi val ence 
that Braidotti’s posthu man posi tion al ity 
demon strates in rela tion to the human ist 
human. In her 2006 paper (2006b) and 
2013 book she neces sar ily, we believe, 
leaves a space for claim ing the human-
ist human (for example, the power of 
human rights discourse as a frame work 
of recog ni tion) whilst always celeb rat ing 
our posthu man qual it ies (for example, 
the merging of human, animal and envir-
on mental polit ics as a post- social imper-
at ive). We view this as a disavowal of 
the human ist human – in the classic 
psycho ana lytic sense – of simul tan eously 
desir ing and reject ing the human. Th is 
act of disavowal reson ates with those of 
us in the crit ical disab il ity studies and 
disab il ity polit ics. 
 A Posthuman Theme: Life Beyond 
the Self 
 In  Th e Posthuman , Braidotti ( 2013 ) devel-
ops the ﬁ rst of a number of posthu man 
themes. Th e ﬁ rst,  life beyond the self , seeks 
to develop a new theory of the human 
subject that ‘takes stock of the posthu man 
turn and hence acknow ledges the decline 
of Humanism’ (2013: 51). Th is decline 
should be celeb rated because it opens up
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN ETHICS 
 ● keeps in mind the perni cious and 
stiﬂ ing impacts of ableism, which we 
deﬁ ne as a discrim in at ory processes 
that ideal ize a narrow version of 
human ness and reject more diverse 
forms of human ity; 
 ● seeks to promote trans dis cip lin ary 
forms of empir ical and theor et ical 
enquiry that breaks discip lin ary 
ortho dox ies, domin ances and 
bound ar ies; 
 ● fore grounds dis/ability as the complex 
for inter rog at ing oppres sion and 
further ing a posthu man polit ics of 
aﬃ  rm a tion. 
 To join our assemblage, please visit www.
dishuman.com. 
 See also Joy; Process Ontologies; Non-
Human Agency 
 Dan Goodley, Rebecca 
Lawthom, Kirsty Liddiard and 
Katherine Runswick-Cole  
 POSTHUMAN ETHICS  
 Posthuman Ethics devel ops from a stream 
of philo sophy along the traject ory of 
Spinoza’s ethics, Nietzsche’s concept of will 
as liber at ive freedom from insti tutes of 
power and post struc tural contin ental philo-
sophy’s expan sion of these theor ists. Th e 
basic premise, from Spinoza, sees the world, 
expans ive into the entire cosmos, as inter-
con nec ted. Individuality is under stood as 
dividu ation where each entity exerts force 
or expres sion that aﬀ ects other entit ies and 
is simul tan eously aﬀ ected by the expressiv-
ity of other entit ies. Th e nature of these 
forces of expres sion and aﬀ ec tion is not 
known in advance. Th is emphas izes that 
each entity is entirely unique to itself based 
on the quality of its speciﬁ c expres sions and 
polit ics of self- advocacy of people with 
intel lec tual disab il it ies, many groups adopt 
the moniker of People First, which is a very 
human istic title. Disability polit ics work the 
edges of posthu man and human ist polit ics. 
 Conclusion: A DisHuman Manifesto 
 Posthuman disab il ity studies seek to 
capture the disrupt ive and aﬃ  rm at ive 
inter ven tions of disab il ity. Our sense is 
that the condi tions of disab il ity and the 
posthu man neces sar ily share a disavowal 
of the human. Th is has led us to develop 
 DisHuman Studies which, we contend, 
simul tan eously acknow ledges the possib il-
it ies oﬀ ered by disab il ity to trouble, reshape 
and re- fashion the human (crip and 
posthu man ambi tions) while at the same 
time assert ing disabled people’s human ity 
(norm at ive and human istic desires). We 
ﬁ nish, there fore, with our DisHuman 
mani festo, which we hope captures the 
poten tial of a posthu man disab il ity studies. 
DisHuman studies: 
 ● unpacks and troubles domin ant 
notions of what it means to be human;  
 ● celeb rates the disrupt ive poten tial of 
disab il ity to trouble these domin ant 
notions; 
 ● acknow ledges that being recog nized as 
a regular normal human being is 
desir able, espe cially for those people 
who have been denied access to the 
category of the human; 
 ● recog nizes disab il ity’s inter sec tional 
rela tion ship with other iden tit ies that 
have been considered less than human 
(asso ci ated with class, gender, sexu al ity, 
ethni city, age); 
 ● aims to develop theory, research, 
art and activ ism that push at the 
bound ar ies of what it means to be 
human and disabled;
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
ism, anti- racism, queer theory, diﬀ abil ity 
theory and animal abol i tion theory, among 
others, which is currently known as inter-
sec tional polit ics. However, ulti mately 
posthu man ethics seeks rela tions based on 
imper cept ible and inﬁ n ite diﬀ er ence, that is, 
not based on anything in advance and based 
on all possible expres sions and aﬀ ects. 
Posthuman ethics knows only diﬀ er ence 
and diﬀ er en ti ation so both the human 
template for life and human discourse’s 
capa city for meas ur ing life are made 
redund ant. In this sense it is also an ahuman 
project as it refutes the priv ilege of human-
ity and like ahuman theory advoc ates for 
human extinc tion and abol i tion of use of 
non- humans. However, unlike many uses of 
the word posthu man and ahuman, posthu-
man ethics is not a temporal project toward 
a future, be it dystopic or utopic. It also seeks 
to address the past as a collect ive of minor-
it arian memor ies in tandem with mono-
lithic major it arian history to evince that we 
have always been confron ted with the capa-
city for posthu man ethical inter ac tions in 
rela tion to domin ance and diﬀ er ence. 
Posthuman ethics can be applied, in seeking 
activ ist modes of inter ac tion, to both imme-
di ate, histor ic ally passed and projec ted 
futures in constant exper i ment a tion with 
altern ate ways of rela tion that allow us to 
rethink memory and futures. Th is exper i-
ment a tion is crucial to the project in that 
posthu man ethics are creat ive, imagin at ive 
and require a certain kind of fright en ing 
and hopeful good faith as deﬁ n ite outcomes 
and so also power driven hypo theses are 
not viable as they presume the nature of 
rela tions and their involved entit ies in 
advance. 
 See 
also 
Ecosophy; 
Feminist 
Post -
humanities; Planetary; Posthuman Critical 
Th eory; Posthumanism. 
 Patricia MacCormack 
the recep tion of these is a coming ling of the 
expres sion’s unique ness with the absorbency 
and capa city for and nature of aﬀ ect a tion of 
the other. Th is always happens within a 
mesh so is neither monodir ec tional nor 
oppos i tional between only two entit ies but 
is always multiple and multi direc tional. 
Similarly an entity may be part of a whole, a 
whole or a collec tion of indi vidu als. 
Relations, phenom ena and thus ‘life’ occurs 
not based on the onto lo gical deﬁ n i tion of 
what a thing is, nor what its value is within 
an arboreal hier arch ical struc ture of ‘living 
things’, which the  human it ies and life 
sciences seek to empir ic ally and exhaust-
ively know, but occurs between things as an 
event of rela tions. Via Deleuze’s work on 
Spinoza, Guattari’s work on  ecosophies and 
Serres’ work on nature, posthu man ethics 
disavows the fetish iz a tion of tech no logy 
and cybor gism, which over value human life 
as a concept over lived real it ies of all earth 
occu pants, 
seen 
in 
 transhuman ism . 
Posthuman ethics explores and exploits the 
radical mani fest a tions of diﬀ er ence already 
(and possibly always) mani fes ted within all 
lives, human, animal, vegetal and ulti mately 
cosmic in that each inter ac tion between 
entit ies is abso lutely speciﬁ c and has 
concrete eﬀ ects on both the form a tion of 
lived reality and its future expres sions. For 
this reason posthu man ethics does not 
diﬀ er en ti ate between discourse and mater i-
al ity as the powers of expres sion of both are 
actu al ized in the lives of all, human 
and non- human. Towards an ethical post-
hu man ism, activ ism and actions which seek 
to open access for the other to express freely 
are sought, which address and allow to 
ﬂ our ish the diﬀ er ence between entit ies. Th is 
refuses the tend ency in human discourse to 
allow 
freedom 
through 
equi val ence, 
subsuma tion, compar ison or fetish iz a tion 
of diﬀ er ence. In this regard posthu man 
ethics begins with drawing together minor-
it arian polit ical move ments such as femin-
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN LITERATURE AND CRITICISM 
 Th e idea of memory as creation under-
stands liter at ure as an agent of conceiv ing 
new concep tual personae deﬁ ned by their 
rela tion al ity and outward- bound inter con-
nec tions, in partic u lar with non- human 
others, 
includ ing 
the 
species- other 
( McHugh 2011 ), nature ( Mentz 2015b ), 
and land scape ( Allewaert 2013 ). Given the 
partic u lar ity of our loca tion and know-
ledge produc tion, our under stand ing of 
liter at ure is always partial and limited. 
Universalism and liberal indi vidu al ism 
promoted by a canon ical, human ist tradi-
tion of liter ary arts there fore do not stand. 
As the subject is now under stood in terms 
of its rela tion with multiple others, it 
involves uplift  ing the once stable and com-
pla cent subject from the famil iar in a pro-
cess of dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion. Dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
refers to an active distan cing from famil iar, 
conven tional ways of think ing and repres-
ent a tion. It also calls for a revi sion of 
norm at ive values, such as sexual and racial 
diﬀ er ences stip u lated and enforced by 
domin ant insti tu tions. Dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
can be a painful process of fear, insec ur ity 
and nostal gia as it involves the ridding of 
cher ished habits of thought and repres ent-
a tion. But it can be product ive in the spirit 
of endur ance and creation in aﬃ  rm at ive 
ethics. 
 In the tradi tion of Barthes’ post struc-
tur al ist thought, the task of criti cism is to 
go beyond ﬂ at repe ti tion and slavish ﬁ del-
ity to the text in the search for its ‘Truth’ 
( Barthes 1975 ). Rather, criti cism should 
enact processes of subject form a tion 
through strategies of dis- iden ti ﬁ c a tion 
and defa mil i ar iz a tion. Th is diﬀ ers from 
criti cism of power loca tions in the tradi-
tion of negat ive dialectics. Critique and 
creativ ity becomes praxis that actu al izes 
the form a tion and real iz a tion of altern at-
ive, aﬃ  rm at ive ﬁ gur a tions that counter 
domin ant, major it arian repres ent a tions of 
the subject. 
 POSTHUMAN LITERATURE AND 
CRITICISM  
 Th e posthu man condi tion is marked by 
rampant outsourced, oﬀ shore exploit a tion 
of labour, invis ible ecolo gical degrad a tion 
that unravels over decades and even 
centur ies in lands distant from most of the 
consumers of extrac ted natural resources, 
and a growing number of displaced 
persons and diasporic popu la tions. Th e 
rippling reper cus sions of these press ing 
chal lenges are of a plan et ary scale. Th is 
puts into ques tion the adequacy and rele -
v ance of human ist repres ent a tional and 
struc tural conven tions in liter at ure and 
criti cism. 
 Posthuman liter ary criti cism ( Taylor 
2013 ; 
 Clarke 
2008 ; 
 Th omsen 
2013 ; 
 Badmington 2011 ;  Lee 2014 ;  Sheehan 
2015 ;  Dinello 2005 ) is an exer cise in trans- 
discip lin ar ity. It intro duces to crit ical 
inquiry monistic vital ism that celeb rates 
the act of think ing as a creation of new 
concepts. Th e inter spers ing of discip lines 
depends on de- famil i ar iz a tion with accus-
tomed habits of thought under the current 
discip lin ary split in the human ist academy. 
Literature is crucial in this joining of 
discip lines as it comple ments scientiﬁ c 
inquiry less prone or open to processes of 
becom ing or diﬀ er en ti ation in a Deleuzian 
monistic onto logy. 
 In posthu man liter ary criti cism, creativ-
ity and critique is a concur rent, dynamic 
prac tice that activ ates, de- territ ori al izes 
stable iden tit ies, and forms aﬃ  rm at ive and 
altern at ive subjects. It rejects linear ity and 
ques tions the exist ence of Truth and cent-
ral ity of Man in the text. Linearity in the 
form of blind defer ence to the author ity of 
estab lished narrat ives of the past prevents 
the creation of new concep tual personae 
and ﬁ gur a tions. Th is calls for a non- linear 
vision of memory as imagin a tion, creation 
as becom ing.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 To Deleuze, the major it arian view of 
the scient ist remains conﬁ ned in the 
outmoded model of the ‘Man of Reason’ in 
the Enlightenment tradi tion of ‘Royal 
science.’ In ﬁ rst- world Western nations, 
this proto type doubles as the char ac ter istic 
of the quint es sen tial citizen. Th e form a tion 
of a new vision of subjectiv ity is thus an 
issue of gener a tional respons ib il ity and 
account ab il ity that answers to the chal-
lenges of social injustice in the posthu man 
age of tech no lo gical capit al ism. Ultimately, 
it involves the revi sion of the role of the 
scient ist and his prac tice, and the public 
percep tion and recep tion of his work. 
 Deleuze and Guattari delin eate the 
diﬀ er ences of ‘Royal’ and ‘minor’ science as 
meth od o logy in  A Th ousand Plateaus : 
 In the ﬁ eld of inter ac tion of the two 
sciences, the ambu lant sciences conﬁ ne 
them selves to invit ing prob lems whose 
solu tion is tied to a whole set of collect ive, 
nonscientiﬁ c activ it ies but whose scientiﬁ c 
solu tion depends, on the contrary, on 
royal science in the way it has trans formed 
the problem by intro du cing it into this 
theor ematic appar atus and its organ iz a-
tion of work.  
 1987: 413 
 Posthuman liter ary criti cism proposes a 
femin ist, post co lo nial, third- world ‘minor 
science’ ( Chen 2010 ;  Harding 2008 ;  Tsing 
2011 ) as an ethic ally trans form at ive 
inquiry which is not bound to economic 
imper at ives or coer cions of advanced 
capit al ism and its cognit ive market inter-
ven tions into living matter. Th e concept of 
‘minor science’ can be borrowed to read 
works of ﬁ ction ( Ghosh 2001 ;  Ondaatje 
2001 ;  Kincaid 2001 ;  Kingsolver 2008 ) that 
reﬂ ect on imper i al ist and patri archal 
implic a tions of major it arian science. Such 
ﬁ ctional works ( Th ayil 2012 ;  Ishiguro 
2006 ;  Barnes 2007 ) also propose new 
deﬁ n i tions and delin eations of the normal 
 Posthuman liter ary criti cism engages 
strands of crit ical inquiry in New 
Humanities as a response to the inter con-
nec ted global chal lenges of ecolo gical crises, 
gender and racial inequal ity, and conten-
tious ﬁ nd ings and exper i ment a tions in life 
sciences, biomedi cine, energy sciences and 
digital tech no logy. Th e growing body of 
schol ar ship in the theor iz a tion ( Nixon 
2011 ;  Huggan and Tiﬀ an 2015 ;  Feder 2014 ; 
 Westling 2013 ) and prac tice of ecocriti cism 
( Buell 2009 ;  Heise 2011 ;  Th ornber 2012 ) 
responds to the current ecolo gical crisis 
aggrav ated by neolib eral capit al ism. It also 
exam ines liter ary works ( Atwood 2013 ;  O. 
Butler 1993 ;  Ozeki 2004 ) that depart from 
anthro po morph ism to develop immin ent 
forms of iden ti ﬁ c a tion of becom ing- earth 
or becom ing- imper cept ible. Moreover, it 
studies ﬁ ctional works that explore the 
ethics of inter ac tion between humans and 
non- human others ( Coetzee 2004 ;  Martel 
2003 ;  Graham 2009 ). Th e posthu man 
subject is then a collect ive assemblage of 
multiple ﬁ gur a tions in the spirit of collect-
ive endur ance in times of global envir on-
mental devast a tion. 
 Under the frame work of posthu man 
crit ical theory, femin ist and post co lo nial 
liter ary criti cism of the post struc tur al ist 
tradi tion are updated ( Ponzanesi and 
Merolla 2005 ;  Minh- ha 2012 ;  Franklin 
2014 ) espe cially in rela tion to the rise of 
global, digital citizen ship in the ﬁ nan cial, 
algorithmic and tech no lo gic ally medi ated 
capit al ism today ( Eggers 2013 ;  McCarthy 
2015 ). A posthu man variant of femin ist 
and post co lo nial criti cism studies liter ary 
works that reﬂ ect on how tech no logy 
prompts or hinders subject revi sion and 
form a tion, and the extent to which it 
encour ages radical dis- engage ment from 
domin ant gender and racial assemblages 
and categor ical diﬀ er ences ( Okorafor 
2015 ;  Adichie 2013 ;  Shteyngart 2010 ;  Diaz 
2008 ;  Cole 2012 ).
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN MUSEUM PRACTICES 
human imagin a tion; they are also the 
emer gent eﬀ ects of contin gent and hetero-
gen eous enact ments, and perform ances 
compris ing both human and non- human 
actants (see  Hodder 2012 ). To illus trate the 
poten tial for the re- framing of human 
subject approaches and their trans la tion 
into onto lo gical and posthu man curat orial 
frame works, I use by way of example a 
green plastic bucket, an item from Museum 
Victoria’s Black Saturday bush ﬁ re collec-
tion to eloquently perform this task 
( Hansen and Griﬃ  ths 2012 ). Th e Black 
Saturday bush ﬁ res in Victoria on 7 
February 2009 were Australia’s worst 
natural disaster. 
 Th e green bucket is framed around Bill 
Putt’s 
auto bi o graph ical 
accounts 
of 
survival where the bucket is used to recall 
and recite his last- ditch attempts to save 
his house from the impend ing furnace. 
Th e collec tions record describes the object 
as a ‘green plastic garden bucket, melted on 
one side and missing the handle. Th e spout 
is still visible. Traces of dried mud adhere 
to the surface.’ While the bucket’s cura -
t orial inter pret a tion acknow ledges the 
subjectiv it ies of this event and its descrip-
tion gestures towards its mater i al ity and 
form, these human subject- orient ated 
frames promote the bucket as a static 
repres ent a tion in service of the human 
social. In doing so its curat orial framing 
denies the other mater ial, discurs ive, tech-
no lo gical, biolo gical and non- human 
aspects of the green bucket agen tial status. 
When we begin to see our world diﬀ er-
ently as entangled with other people and 
animate, inan im ate things, these human 
subject/object- based museum prac tices 
appear incon gru ous, even decept ive. 
 Untying human subject- based under-
stand ings of the bucket as a bounded ‘object’ 
and as ‘arte fact’ requires its re- ascrip tion in 
posthu man terms as ‘thing ness’ and as 
‘compos i tion’. Th e attri bu tion of thing ness 
and patho lo gical, and the recon ﬁ g ur a tion 
and imagin a tion of the human body. 
 See also Joy; Earth; Ecohorror; (Material) 
Ecocriticism; Neocolonial; Literature of 
Liberation. 
 Carolyn Lau 
 POSTHUMAN MUSEUM 
PRACTICES  
 In a more- than human world, museums 
as custodi ans of cultural memory and as 
trusted inform a tion
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 Bucket – Strathewen, 7 February 2009 (Bushfi re Damaged).  COPYRIGHT MUSEUM VICTORIA/ CC  BY 
(LICENSED AS ATTRIBUTION 4.0 INTERNATIONAL). 1 
is remin is cent of Heidegger’s ( 1971 ) propos-
i tion that our being in the world is of a 
thingly nature where things are not separ ate 
from us, rather things all func tion in rela-
tion to each other ( Hodder 2012 : 28). I, 
however, re- work Heidegger’s thingly world, 
to that of ‘thing ness’ to refer to the object as 
an exten ded and dispersed spatial and 
temporal thing made up of conat ive and 
onto lo gic ally diverse vital elements that 
includes the non- human. I also reframe the 
object as ‘compos i tion’ to refer to its distrib-
uted perform ativ ity incor por at ing mater ial, 
discurs ive, social, scientiﬁ c, human, non- 
human, natural and cultural factors (see 
 Barad 2007 ). Th e ﬁ rst task in its onto lo gical 
refash ion ing is to re- work the human isms 
that hold the bucket’s object hood and inter-
pret a tion in place. Disrupting these norm-
at ive human isms and the agen tial rela tions 
organ ized around Bill, his exper i ences and 
actions that currently under lie our under-
stand ing of the green plastic bucket neces-
sit ates the disas sembling of these rela tions 
and their recon sti t u tion into and through a 
metanom ic ally diverse list that repres ents
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN MUSEUM PRACTICES 
new mater i al isms ( Bennett 2010 ) and 
relev ant tech nical, scientiﬁ c and histor ical 
inform a tion. Th e plastic of which the 
bucket is made comprises a series of tight 
inter de pend ences from its histor ical gene-
a logy in respect to the devel op ment of 
plastic, its human actants such as civil 
engin eers, and its sequences of produc tion 
from its mater i als (carbon, oil, polymer) to 
molten plastic, pres sure and injec tion 
mould ing. By gath er ing together the 
actants that make up the ‘compos i tion’ and 
re- assem bling them in new types of rela-
tions we can consider the perform at ive 
eﬀ ects of their inter de pend en cies and 
aﬀ ord ances overall as a distributive agency 
(see  Bennett 2010 : viii). With the primary 
agency of ﬁ re, for example, its aﬀ ord ances, 
includ ing its phys ical and chem ical prop er-
ties, refer to a series of tight inter de pend-
ences that exhibit diﬀ er ent tempor al it ies, 
clus ter ings, taut ness and enabling eﬀ ects 
that cohere in certain ways around the 
bucket. For example, temper at ures above 
40 degrees Celsius, climate change as an 
agency aﬀ orded by humans, inter ac ted 
with other aﬀ ord ances such as wind speed 
and the rapid oxid a tion of the Australian 
bush in the exothermic chem ical process of 
combus tion, releas ing heat, light and 
smoke that enabled the Kilmore East ﬁ re to 
emerge and converge on Bill Putt’s prop-
erty and the bucket. Th is sequence is locked 
into a series of other folded, entangled and 
embed ded rela tions (organic and non- 
organic vital it ies, discourses and mater i al-
it ies), a failed water pump, the bucket’s 
form and spout as an aﬀ ord ance to hold 
and pour water, the chem ical compos i tion 
of plastic combined with radiant heat and 
its molten eﬀ ects, Bill’s fear of loss, dying 
live stock, burning build ings and the act of 
running. As a ‘compos i tion’ the green 
bucket is no longer a static thing; rather it 
emerges through multiple loca tions, and as 
the eﬀ ect of its distri bu tion across many 
the bundles of mater ial, tech nical, concep-
tual, ecolo gical, social and emotional 
compon ents that make up its distrib uted 
assemblage. Th is assort ment of conat ive 
things comprises not only human bodies 
and the human subject, Bill Putt, his bodily 
actions and his stories; but also its other 
multi far i ous 
elements: 
the 
bucket’s 
processes of produc tion, its geograph ical 
loca tion, its exten ded histor ies from the 
deep past to its museo lo gical ascrip tion, and 
its mater ial and non- human features and 
form. To this end, the list comprises plastic, 
carbon, hydro gen, oil, coal, poly mers, mud, 
ﬁ re, moulds, digital code, climate change, 
temper at ure, wind speed, Strathewen, 
Victoria, 7 February 2009, mud brick house, 
failed water pump, curat ors, collec tion 
managers, docu ment a tion proced ures and 
so forth, some of whom were previ ously 
invis ible in its formal object descrip tion. 
From this onto lo gic ally diverse list of conat-
ive elements, Bill and his subjectiv it ies 
there fore become just one of many actants 
that inter mingle with the other compon ents 
of the compos i tion. In doing so I draw 
inspir a tion from the argu ment of Olsen 
et al. ( 2012 ) that people, objects, mater i al ity 
and the discurs ive do not operate in onto lo-
gic ally distinct ive realms. 
 Th e list also oper ates as a mech an ism 
for re- ascrib ing each of its compon ents as 
‘actants’ (vital subjects). Th is task re- works 
agency away from the human to acknow-
ledge the bucket’s multiple agen cies includ-
ing its mater i al it ies, phys ical form and 
multi far i ous 
discurs ive 
and 
aﬀ ect ive 
framing (i.e. scientiﬁ c, histor ical, cultural, 
ideo lo gical, thoughts, desires). 
 In order to attrib ute agen cies and 
aﬀ ord ances to each of the bucket’s elements 
(for example biolo gical, elemental, ecolo-
gical processes, tech nical and tech no lo gical 
processes, 
human 
actions, 
thoughts, 
desires), I draw on liter at ure in the post -
hu man it ies ( Braidotti 2013 ;  Hodder 2012 ),
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
POSTHUMAN RIGHTS,  A MICROPOLITICS OF
animate and inan im ate things ( Braidotti 
2013 ), nourish new forms of inter spe cies 
connec tions and inter cul tural rela tions, 
and other modes of thought and concepts 
in ways that more closely approx im ate the 
complex it ies of life itself. 
 New posthu man collec tions research 
and docu ment a tion proced ures have the 
poten tial to support the analysis and 
descrip tion of objects as thing ness and 
as socio- mater ial compos i tions. Th ese 
prac tices there fore involve: (1) the detail-
ing of actants that make up the exten ded 
compos i tion in the ﬁ eld; (2) their multiple 
agen cies, 
sequences, 
inde pend ences, 
entan gle ments, inter ac tions, spatial and 
temporal dimen sions; and (3) the carto-
graphic mapping of the move ment of these 
actants as repres ent at ive of their perfor-
mativ ity as emer gent processes. 
 Bill did indeed save his house and his 
life, but he lost live stock and several 
outbuild ings on his prop erty to the ﬁ re. 
 See also Art in the Anthropocene; Critical 
Posthumanism; 
Non-Human 
Agency; 
Ontological 
Turn; 
Posthumanist 
Performativity. 
 Note 
 1. Museums Victoria Collections, http://
collec tions.museum victoria.com.au/
items/1712046 [accessed 9 November 
2016]. 
 Fiona R. Cameron 
 POSTHUMAN RIGHTS, 
A MICROPOLITICS OF  
 In this entry I examine the possib il ity of a 
micro pol it ics of posthu man rights which 
subverts the major it arian model of human 
rights, ﬁ gured as a certain kind of think ing 
diverse actants as part of more diverse, 
dynamic social collect ives and exten ded 
networks (cf.  Hodder 2012 ). Its solid ity acts 
as a stand- in for its distrib uted actants and 
the agen cies that make up the bucket (cf 
 Bennett 2010 ;  Coole and Frost 2010 ). In 
consid er ing the bucket as ‘thing ness’ and as 
‘compos i tion’, and the descrip tion of its 
elements, mater i als and stories attrib uted 
to it as ‘actants’ and as ‘agency’, and the term 
‘perform ativ ity’ to describe the inter ac tion 
of the actants as part of the exten ded, 
networked compos i tion, allows us to move 
beyond the social construc tion of the 
‘object’, ‘arte fact’ and ‘collec tion’. Where 
conven tional terms promoted a sole focus 
on social and cultural conven tions of 
language, describ ing, naming and narrat-
ing histor ies and personal accounts as 
bounded objects, these new terms gesture 
towards their rela tional re- conﬁ g ur a tion 
that take account of the active and 
entangled life of all its compon ents. 
 Th e shift  of social subjectiv ity from the 
human to include the non- human world 
through the attri bu tion of each of the 
objects’ elements as actants, and the many 
ways these rela tional subjects are entangled 
and folded together, better illus trate the 
agentic or anim ated rela tion ships we have 
to life in general. Th e inter ac tion of these 
multiple rela tional subjects also consti tutes 
collect ive forms of social agency which 
will promote new under stand ings of 
history as emer gent from within these 
more- than- human 
collect ives. 
Th e 
compos i tion also promotes new forms of 
human civic life and social ity to include 
animate and inan im ate things compris ing, 
vari ously, tech no logy, mater i al ity, trees, 
climatic systems, humans and discourses, 
each as rela tional subjects and together as 
collect ive forms of agency. Th is more 
inclus ive vision of a shared world has the 
poten tial to promote and enhance respect 
and ethical concern for diversity of both
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN RIGHTS, A MICROPOLITICS OF  
 From Human Rights to Post-Human 
Rights  
 In her book  Transpositions  Rosi Braidotti 
critiques Peter Singer’s util it arian liberal 
model of animal rights. Th is critique allows 
us to open up a minor it arian think ing of 
rights as posthu man. In her argu ment, she
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
POSTHUMAN RIGHTS, A MICROPOLITICS OF 
the many compet ing interests involved. 
Indeed, having worked on the self: 
 You continue to aﬃ  rm . . . a tele olo gical 
concep tion of nature in which the 
meaning of death is set, but now you 
acknow ledge how this judg ment may be 
more contest able than you had previ ously 
appre ci ated . . . What was here to fore non- 
nego ti able may now gradu ally become 
rethink able. You now register more 
actively 
the 
import ance 
of 
giving 
presumptive respect to the judg ment of 
the suﬀ erer in this domain, even when the 
cultiv a tion of crit ical respons ive ness to 
them disturbs your own concep tion of 
nature, death, or divin ity. 
 Connolly 1999 : 147 
 Connolly’s notion of  micro pol it ics allows 
us to rethink the rela tion between rights 
and bioeth ics. It allows us to focus on the 
actual desires and interests of the indi-
vidual who claims a right in the biomed-
ical context. Similar to Braidotti’s nomadic 
ethics this crit ical respons ive ness leads to 
a trans form a tion, think ing about how 
rights may emerge in such instances and 
their rela tion to indi vidual freedom and to 
community. Connolly’s notion of an 
ambigu ous polit ics of becom ing assists us 
in bring ing Braidotti’s nomadic ethics to 
bear on a reima gin ing of rights, ﬁ gured as 
posthu man rights, that is, an active mode 
of using rights discourse in a subvers ive 
manner to undo accep ted models of 
subjectiv ity, community, iden tity, law and 
polit ics. 
 Conclusion 
 Such a praxis of rights as posthu man cele-
b rates the creation of a new think ing and 
praxis of rights, one which is cut loose 
from the ordered and major it arian think-
ing of rights in neolib eral modern ity. 
Posthuman rights embody the claims of 
 In seeking ‘a micro- polit ics of becom-
ing and an ethics’ ( Braidotti 2006a : 142), 
Braidotti’s nomadic ethics bears rela tion to 
what William Connolly calls an ‘ethos of 
engage ment’ with exist ing social givens, 
which may bring about unex pec ted 
consequences 
or 
trans form a tions. 
Connolly calls this ‘an ambigu ous  polit ics 
of becom ing by which a new entity is 
propelled into being out of injury, energy 
and diﬀ er ence’ ( Connolly 1999 : 160). 
Connolly argues that rights cannot be 
created by a top down ‘molar polit ics of 
public oﬃ   cials’ (ibid.: 147), but comes 
instead from a mobil iz a tion of self- styling 
selves, ‘the molecu lar move ments of micro-
pol it ics’ (149). Th is  molar polit ics blocks 
the dialo gic polit ical process and creates 
stasis. 
 In discuss ing the concept of  micro pol it-
ics , Connolly uses the analogy of how an 
indi vidual in working out her posi tion on 
bioeth ical issues is confron ted with diﬀ er-
ing views both outside and within oneself. 
He gives the example of the right to die 
and of an indi vidual who believes that 
death must only come when either God or 
nature brings it ( Connolly 1999 : 146). Th is 
person is shocked by move ments who call 
for a right to doctor- assisted death for 
those in severe pain as the result of a 
terminal illness. However, once the initial 
shock of this claim dissip ates, the person 
begins to think of the suﬀ er ing of termin-
ally ill indi vidu als in a world of high tech 
medical care. In such a case, Connolly 
claims, ‘ one part of your subjectiv ity now 
begins to work on other parts . In this case 
your concern for those who writhe in 
agony as they approach death may work on 
contest able assump tions about divin ity or 
nature already burnt into your being’ (ibid., 
emphasis in original). Connolly high lights 
the uncer tain ties and tension within the 
indi vidual self on the issue of a right to die, 
aft er such an indi vidual starts to weigh up
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMAN SEXUALITY 
politico- aesthetic subject iden tit ies (in ﬂ ux 
or as a stand point iden tity) and the extent 
to which posthu man iden tit ies and their 
rela tion ship with sex and sexu al ity, and 
indeed their very deﬁ n i tion of ‘sex’, is 
contested. Aft er Foucault’s decon struc tion 
of sexu al ity as a social gene a lo gical project 
of social control of bodies and pleas ure, 
femin ism took up sexu al ity as isomorph ic-
ally annexed to male pleas ure and the 
phallus, both projects showing there has 
never been anything biolo gical or natural 
about sex. Foucault forsook the term for 
‘pleas ure’, Deleuze and Guattari for ‘desire’ 
and femin ists such as Irigaray and Kristeva 
for ‘jouis sance’. All three share a conﬁ g ur a-
tion of a desig ni ﬁ ed and dereg u lated body 
where no part of the body stands as the 
domin ant signi ﬁ er of either sex or gender 
(formerly the phallus but also the 
proscribed licit and illicit sexual oper a tions 
of all body parts in rela tion with each 
other). Th ey also share a refusal of act 
produ cing subject so the over arch ing 
binary of hetero norm ativ ity and homo-
sexu al ity and its modern history from 
crim inal aber ra tion to equal normal ized 
subject posi tion is defunct. Salient to this, 
posthu man sexu al ity is entirely extric ated 
from repro duc tion’s rela tion ship with sex; 
because it renor mal izes gendered roles 
within repro duc tion, because it is antag on-
istic to posthu man ism’s celeb ra tion of the 
hybrid and hybrids are sterile, and due to 
the ahuman’s advoc a tion of human extinc-
tion in the face of over pop u la tion. 
Posthuman sexu al ity values connectiv ity 
between entit ies which could be two, or two 
parts within one, or two assemblages, to 
create imagin at ive ﬂ ows of desire, and two 
simply marks the over throw of the domin-
ant singu lar ity of the phallus, but posthu-
man sexu al ity is not limited to two. In this 
sense ‘two’ simply indic ates more than and 
less than one, a posi tion to which the 
trans versal assemblages of indi vidu als 
who do not see a binary cut between 
thought and action, life and death, envir-
on ment and human ity, or anim al ity and 
human ity. Th is is a similar process to what 
Braidotti terms the prac tice of ‘defam il ar-
iz a tion’ in which ‘the knowing subject 
disen gages itself from the domin ant 
norm at ive vision he or she had become 
accus tomed to, to evolve towards a post -
hu man frame of refer ence’ ( Braidotti 2013 : 
167). Th is allows us to think of a micro-
polit ics of life as  zoe (as mater ial embod ied 
singu lar ity) which contests the order ing 
molar polit ics of Life as  bios (under stood as 
tran scend ental and always already male). 
Th is micro pol it ical encounter with the law 
undoes the impos i tion of a biopol it ical 
order ing on indi vidu als and allows them, 
through their own continu ous inter ven-
tion in the domains of law and polit ics, to 
perform an active and contest at ory form 
of citizen ship. 
 See also Bodies Politic; Geo-Hydro-Solar-
Bio-Techno-Politics; Posthuman Critical 
Th eory; Critical Posthumanism; (Un)
Documented 
Citizenship; 
Posthuman 
Disability and DisHuman Studies. 
 Patrick Hanaﬁ n 
 POSTHUMAN SEXUALITY  
 It is not suﬃ   cient to liber ate sexu al ity; it is 
also neces sary to liber ate ourselves from the 
notion of sexu al ity itself. 
 Foucault 2000 : 245 
 Posthuman sexu al ity ques tions the utility 
of the very concept of sexu al ity itself and 
for this reason ranges across a dispar ate 
number of terrains includ ing femin ism, 
 LGBTQIA theory, therian and becom ing- 
fabu lated subjectiv ity among others. Th ese 
terrains overlap in the extent to which
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Queer theory attemp ted this address – in 
its post- USA incarn a tions via Continental 
philo sophy queer went further than sexual 
alter ity to become a refusal of hetero norm-
at ive gender ing and sexu al ity and subject-
ive categor ies entirely. However, the issue 
remains a conten tious one and the activ ist 
ques tion facing posthu man sexu al ity now 
is ‘if we have rid ourselves of all sex, gender 
and sexu al ity, how do we continue to ﬁ ght 
against the oppres sion of what are still 
considered minor it ari ans based on their 
rela tion ship with sex and gender?’ Th is is a 
ques tion which contin ues to be addressed 
within posthu man sexu al ity. 
 See also Feminicity; Trans*; Feminist 
Posthumanities; Posthuman Ethics. 
 Patricia MacCormack 
 POSTHUMANISM  
 My work on this topic begins with an insist-
ence on distin guish ing between ‘the posthu-
man’ and ‘posthu man ism ’. Many of those 
who aspire to, or imagine the inev it ab il ity 
of, what is oft en called a ‘posthu man’ condi-
tion – I am think ing in partic u lar of ﬁ gures 
such as ‘transhuman ist’ Ray Kurzweil (of 
 Th e Singularity is Near fame) and philo-
sopher Nick Bostrom – are, philo soph ic ally 
speak ing, rather tradi tional human ists. 
Bostrom’s version of the posthu man derives, 
as he freely admits, from ideals of rational 
agency and human perfect ib il ity drawn 
directly from Renaissance Humanism and 
the Enlightenment, and its guiding lights 
are (among other pillars of philo soph ical 
human ism) Isaac Newton, John Locke, 
Th omas Hobbes and Immanuel Kant. 
 Th is ‘human ist posthu man ism’ (as I 
label it in  What Is Posthumanism? ) ( Wolfe 
2010 ) is prob lem atic for at least a couple of 
reasons. First, it encour ages us to think 
so- called castrated female has been releg-
ated in psycho ana lysis. Posthuman sexu al-
ity also values the space between the two as 
an ethical site of desire, what Irigaray calls 
the ‘mucosal’, whereby the model of the 
vulva as two sets of two lips shows self- 
touch ing, desire without binar ies of 
mastery and submis sion, and prolif er at ive 
parts indic ate both the limit less nature of 
sexu al ity and, as lips, the discurs ive regu la-
tion the speak ing of sexu al ity oper ates. 
Th is is why Foucault and Lotringer both 
claim we speak too much about sexu al ity. 
Our society is satur ated with sexu al ity but 
actual bodies, pleas ures, intens it ies and 
what consti tutes the sexual have been 
largely anni hil ated due to the over em phasis 
on descrip tion and the commodi ﬁ c a tion 
and market ab il ity of sexu al ity as a concept 
abstrac ted from bodies and pleas ure in 
the train ing of docile consumers. Both 
theor ists advoc ate silence as a response 
to the ques tion of sexu al ity, while femin ists 
oft en utilize play with language (via 
poetry and art) to reﬂ ect the playful 
exper i ment a tion 
posthu man 
sexu al ity 
advoc ates. 
 Posthuman sexu al ity raises an ethical 
conun drum, however. Subjectivity has 
mistakenly collapsed gender and sexu al ity 
(whether due to dimorph ism creat ing 
gender divi sion or both as corpor eal regu-
lated sexual systems). Th is means there is a 
history and present need for activ ism 
involving minor it arian subjects, partic u-
larly women but also those addressed 
under the acronym  LGBTQIA (lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, trans-, queer, inter sex, 
asexual), itself an acronym which indis-
crim in ately 
collapses 
sexu al ity 
with 
gendered iden tity. Similarly the contem-
por ary debate between some trans persons 
and so- called ‘terfs’ (trans exclu sion ary 
radical femin ists) is in one sense more 
about the debate between whether we 
should have gendered categor ies at all.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMANISM 
the onto lo gical hier archy just outlined. It is 
posthu man ist, that is to say, in its oppos i-
tion to anthro po centrism and to the 
assump tion that the subject worthy of 
ethical recog ni tion, in any way coin cides, 
 prima facie , with the taxo nomic desig na-
tion ‘human’. But it is human ist, and in a 
debil it at ing way, in  how it mounts this 
argu ment philo soph ic ally. Whether in 
Regan’s neo-Kantian version or Singer’s 
util it arian version, what secures ethical 
stand ing for the animal is a set of char ac-
ter ist ics, qual it ies and poten ti al it ies that 
ends up looking an awful lot like  us. And 
so animals are accor ded stand ing because 
they embody, in dimin ished form, some 
norm at ive concept of the ‘human’. And that 
would seem to be at odds with the ethical 
commit ment that got the whole enter prise 
of animal rights philo sophy up and 
running in the ﬁ rst place – namely, the 
desire to recog nize the ethical value of 
diﬀ er ent, non- human ways of being in the 
world. 
 What all of this means is that the nature 
of thought itself, and not just the  object of 
thought, must change if it is to be posthu-
man ist. More precisely, the ‘human’ can no 
longer be considered either the origin or the 
end of thought, and in at least two senses. 
First, the ‘human’ is not an  explanans but an 
 explanan dum , not an explan a tion but that 
which needs to be explained. To put it 
another way, the most philo soph ic ally 
complex and prag mat ic ally robust accounts 
of what consti tutes the speciﬁ city of this 
thing we call ‘human’ are accounts in which 
the idea of the ‘human’ as we’ve inher ited it 
from the Western philo soph ical tradi tion 
actu ally does no heavy lift ing. For example, 
many people would argue that part of what 
makes humans ‘human’ is a unique rela tion-
ship between language and cogni tion. But 
to really under stand what is going on in that 
rela tion ship – to really explore the rela tion-
ship 
between 
the 
neuro physiolo gical 
that the full achieve ment of that thing we 
call ‘human’ must be predic ated upon over-
com ing and ﬁ nally tran scend ing not just 
our ‘animal’ origins (in the name of a 
rational manip u la tion and optim iz a tion of 
the human condi tion) but also the fetters 
of mater i al ity and embod i ment alto-
gether. Th e clearest symptom of this very 
old human ist philo soph ical desire is 
transhuman ism’s predic tion that we will, 
someday soon, be able to over come all 
diseases and inﬁ rm it ies, even tu ally achiev-
ing radic ally exten ded lifespans, and even 
immor tal ity. Leaving aside the prac tical 
and prag matic ques tions that accom pany 
this claim, I merely wish to point out that 
the achieve ment of the fully ‘human’ condi-
tion by the killing oﬀ , tran scend ence, 
repres sion or over com ing of the ‘animal’ 
body is a very old and very famil iar hall-
mark of human ism – and, histor ic ally 
speak ing, a very danger ous one, as recent 
work in biopol it ical thought by Michel 
Foucault, Judith Butler, Jacques Derrida, 
Donna Haraway, Giorgio Agamben and 
others has made clear. Th e intro duc tion of 
such an onto lo gical hier archy between the 
‘human’ and the ‘animal’ (and the anim al ity 
 of the human) has been, as these thinkers 
remind us, one of the key discurs ive tech-
no lo gies for render ing not just animal 
popu la tions, but various  human popu la-
tions, ‘killable but not murder able’. 
 A second reason that this ‘human ist 
posthu man ism’ is prob lem atic is that even 
when it does not indulge in such famil iar 
strategies – indeed, even when it opposes 
them – the human ist mode of thought in 
which such oppos i tion is mounted under-
cuts what may be quite admir able ethical, 
polit ical or other impulses that we share 
with human ism. For example, animal 
rights philo sophy as artic u lated by its two 
most import ant found ing philo soph ers – 
Tom Regan and Peter Singer – is certainly 
posthu man ist in the sense that it opposes
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
human beings are  pros thetic beings. What 
we call ‘we’ is in fact a multi pli city of rela-
tions between ‘us’ and ‘not us’, ‘inside’ and 
‘outside’, organic and non- organic, things 
‘present’ and things ‘absent’. 
 What all this means is that posthu   -
 man ism distances itself from the trans-
human ism discussed above most decis ively 
by recon ceiv ing the rela tion ship between 
what we call ‘the human’ and the ques tion 
of  ﬁ nitude – not just the ﬁ nitude that 
obtains in our being bound to other forms 
of embod ied life that live and die as we do, 
that are shaped by the same processes that 
shape us, but also the ﬁ nitude of our rela-
tion ship to the tools, languages, codes, 
maps and semi otic systems that make the 
world cognit ively avail able to us in the 
ﬁ rst place. If ‘the map is not the territ ory’ 
(as Gregory Bateson ( 1988 ) once put it, 
borrow ing 
a 
phrase 
from 
Alfred 
Korzybski), then this means that the very 
maps that make the world avail able to us 
also make the world, at the same time, 
 unavail able  to us. While this may sound 
para dox ical, it is in fact common- sensical. 
For example, were we to seek the most 
empir ic ally, 
scien tiﬁ c ally 
exhaust ive 
descrip tion of a partic u lar piece of land, 
we would ﬁ nd ourselves, very quickly, 
consult ing a host of experts in various 
ﬁ elds: geolo gists, hydro lo gists, botan ists, 
zoolo gists and so on. And what we would 
ﬁ nd is that the more we empir ic ally scru-
tin ize the object of analysis, deploy ing all 
the forms of expert ise and types of know-
ledge that we can possibly muster, the 
more complex and multi- dimen sional that 
object becomes. From this vantage, the 
‘territ ory’ being studied becomes a ‘virtual’ 
space, but for this new mode of thought 
called ‘posthu man ism’, ‘virtual’ here doesn’t 
mean ‘less real’, it means  more real. 
 Now all of this might seem merely a 
matter of taste, but if we believe soci olo gist 
Niklas Luhmann ( 1995 ), this new form of 
wetware of the brain, the symbolic processes 
that shape that wetware, and the evol u tion-
ary processes in and through which both 
have co- evolved – we have at our disposal 
all sorts of concep tual tools not avail able to 
Descartes or Kant or Aristotle, tools that 
allow us to explain how the ‘human’ is the 
 product of processes that are, strictly speak-
ing, inhuman and ahuman. How do we 
know? Because we now know that the very 
same processes produce similar products in 
non- human beings as well, as well- known 
exper i ments with great apes (such as those 
conduc ted 
by 
scient ist 
Sue 
Savage-
Rumbaugh with the bonobo, Kanzi) have 
shown (see  Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin 
1996 ). 
 Moreover – and more radic ally – not 
only is the line between human and non- 
human impossible to deﬁ n it ively draw 
with regard to the binding together of 
neuro physiology, cognit ive states and 
symbolic beha viours, the line between 
‘inside’ and ‘outside’, ‘brain’ and ‘mind’, is 
also impossible to draw deﬁ n it ively. For 
the ‘human’, what makes us ‘us’ – whether 
we are talking about cultural and anthro-
po lo gical inher it ances, tool use and tech-
no lo gies, archives and pros thetic devices, 
or semi otic systems of all kinds – is always 
already on the scene before we arrive, 
provid ing the very ante cedent condi tions 
of possib il ity for our  becom ing ‘human’. In a 
funda mental sense, then, what makes us 
‘us’ is precisely  not us; it is not even ‘human’ 
– a fact that is partic u larly clear in the 
various 
pros thetic 
tech no lo gies 
that 
human beings use to oﬄ  oad and exter i or-
ize memory and commu nic a tion, which in 
turn reshape the anatomy and physiology 
of the brain. And what is true of those 
tech no lo gies is true of all semi otic systems 
and codes, of even the most rudi ment ary 
type. In short, dating back thou sands 
of years to the advent of tool use and, later, 
symbolic systems of commu nic a tion,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTHUMANIST PERFORMATIVITY 
ated only by scientiﬁ c know ledge in its 
multiple repres ent a tional forms. Th is 
model is so entrenched within Western 
culture that it has taken on a common- 
sense appeal. And with it, the inert ness of 
nature as a time less and ahis tor ical entity 
await ing/invit ing repres ent a tion goes now 
mostly undebated ( Barad 2003 ). 
 Th e taken- for-granted onto lo gical gap 
between words and things upon which 
modern Western science rests has gener-
ated ques tions around the accur acy of 
repres ent a tions, espe cially among femin ist, 
post struc tur al ist, post co lo nial critics and 
queer theor ists ( Butler 1993 ;  Foucault 
1973 ,  1972 ,  1977 ,  1980 ;  Haraway 1991 , 
 1992a ,  1997 ;  Latour 1991 ). Th eir search 
for altern at ives to the static rela tion al ity 
model proposed by repres ent a tion al ism 
has brought forward perform at ive under-
stand ings of the nature of scientiﬁ c prac-
tices that shift  the focus from linguistic 
repres ent a tions to discurs ive prac tices, i.e. 
from ques tions of corres pond ence between 
descrip tions and reality to matters of 
prac tice/doings/actions. 
 Michel Foucault was the ﬁ rst to theor ize 
discurs ive prac tices as the local sociohis tor-
ical mater ial condi tions that enable and 
constrain discip lin ary know ledge prac tices, 
and produce – rather than merely describe 
– the ‘subjects’ and ‘objects’ of know ledge 
prac tices. More recently, queer theor ist 
Judith Butler ( 1993 ) drew on Foucault’s 
sugges tion that the repe ti tion of regu lat ory 
bodily prac tices produces a speciﬁ ed mater-
i al iz a tion of the body to link her notion of 
gender perform ativ ity to the mater i al iz a-
tion of sexed bodies. As a result of these and 
other eﬀ orts towards a perform at ive under-
stand ing of iden tity, matter loses its tradi-
tional connota tion as passive blank slate of 
culture to emerge as ‘a process of mater i al iz-
a tion that stabil izes over time to produce 
the eﬀ ect of bound ary, ﬁ xity, and surface we 
call matter’ ( Butler 1993 : 9). 
thought, this constitutively para dox ical 
form of reason, is in fact a hall mark of 
modern iz a tion and of modern ity itself, 
under stood as a process of ‘func tional 
diﬀ er en ti ation’ of society into discrete 
autopoi etic social systems, each with its 
own govern ing codes of know ledge and 
commu nic a tion (what is some times called, 
more moral ist ic ally, ‘frag ment a tion’ or 
‘special iz a tion’), each strug gling to manage 
and reduce the increas ing complex ity of a 
larger envir on ment that they them selves 
help to produce, in fact, in deploy ing their 
own special ized discourses. From this 
vantage, the contin gency of the various 
codes and ‘maps’ that we use to make sense 
of the world around us is in fact a reser voir 
of the very complex ity those codes and 
maps attempt to reduce. Posthumanist 
thought, in this sense, is both an index and 
an agent of complex ity. 
 See also Anthropism/Immanent Humanism; 
Posthuman 
Critical 
Th eory; 
Critical 
Posthumanism; Insurgent Posthumanism; 
Ontological Turn. 
 Cary Wolfe 
 POSTHUMANIST 
PERFORMATIVITY  
 Th eories of scientiﬁ c know ledge and liberal 
social theor ies owe much to the repres ent-
a tion al ist belief that there is perfect corres-
pond ence and, consequently, onto lo gical 
distinc tion between linguistic descrip tions 
and reality. Representationalism, in par -
tic u lar, postu lates that that which is 
repre s en ted is held to be inde pend ent of 
all prac tices of repres ent ing. Th is system 
of repres ent a tion is oft en theor ized as a 
tripart ite arrange ment that places the 
(human) knower in a rela tion of abso lute 
extern al ity to nature and the world, medi-
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
the meeting of the ‘social’ and the ‘natural’ 
– they are an instance where matter and 
meaning meet in the literal sense. Th is 
rela tion al ist onto logy refuses the repres-
ent a tion al ist ﬁ xa tion for ‘words’ and ‘things’ 
as separ ate entit ies by putting emphasis on 
the insepar ab il ity and co- constitutive ness 
of mater i al ity and meaning. Building upon 
this perform at ive meta phys ics, Barad’s 
agen tial realism proposes a posthu man ist 
account of perform ativ ity that poses 
matter as ongoing histor icity, a congeal ing 
of agency that she deﬁ nes as ‘intra- action’ 
– i.e. ‘caus ally constrain ing nondetermin-
istic enact ments through which matter- in-
the- process-of- becom ing is sedi men ted 
out and enfol ded in further mater i al iz a-
tions’ (2003: 823). Hence, within this 
frame work, matter is not just ‘a kind of 
cita tion al ity’ 
( Butler 
1993 : 
15), 
but 
rather an active ‘agent’ in its ongoing 
mater i al iz a tion. 
 Barad’s agen tial realism and its notion 
of posthu man ist perform ativ ity provide a 
useful frame work to grapple with the 
insepar ab il ity of matter and meaning, 
and ‘the mater ial- discurs ive nature of 
constraints, condi tions and prac tices’ 
(2007: 152). Th is makes agen tial realism an 
‘onto- epistem-ology’ ( Barad 2003 : 829), a 
prac tice- of-knowing- in-being capable to 
account for the ways in which bodies come 
to matter. By evid en ti at ing the red- thread 
of ethic al ity that keeps the world together, 
agen tial realism takes a step towards ‘a 
more ecolo gical sens ib il ity’ ( Bennett 2010 : 
10), and embraces a diverse polit ics of 
agency capable of distrib ut ing value more 
gener ously and foster ing ethical and wiser 
inter ven tions into such renewed ecology. 
 See also ‘It’; Quantum Anthropology; Non-
Human Agency. 
 Elisa Fiore 
 However, femin ist new mater i al ist 
scholar Karen Barad ( 2003 ,  2007 ) argues 
that, despite these import ant elab or a tions, 
perform ativ ity theor ies fail to give an 
account of the body’s histor icity that 
succeeds in bring ing the discurs ive and the 
mater ial in closer prox im ity. In her view, 
the active role of the body’s mater i al ity in 
the work ings of power is left  unthe or ized, 
which leaves ques tions about the mater ial 
nature of discurs ive prac tices hanging in 
the air, and impli citly re- inscribes matter 
as passive substance or end product of the 
‘social’. Th is failure to recog nize matter’s 
dynam ism defrauds it of its capa city as an 
active factor in further mater i al iz a tions 
and thus rein states the suprem acy of 
culture and language as product ive forces. 
What is needed to under stand power in 
the full ness of its mater i al ity is to account 
for the ways in which matter and discourse 
entwine and co- parti cip ate in the deﬁ n i-
tion and mater i al iz a tion of the human and 
its others, so as to account for non- human 
forms agency and matter’s implic a tion in 
its ongoing histor icity. 
 Barad’s contri bu tion towards the devel-
op ment of a posthu man ist under stand ing 
of perform ativ ity is based on a philo soph-
ical account that she has deﬁ ned ‘agen tial 
realism’, an epistem o lo gical and onto lo gical 
frame work that proposes a mater i al ist 
and posthu man ist rework ing of famil iar 
notions such as perform ativ ity, discurs ive 
prac tices, mater i al iz a tion, agency and caus-
al ity among others. Agential realism takes 
quantum phys i cist Niels Bohr’s philo-
sophy- physics as an apt start ing point for 
think ing the natural and the social worlds 
together, and gaining some import ant clues 
about how to theor ize the nature of the 
rela tion ship between them. 
 Bohr’s epistem o lo gical frame work calls 
into ques tion Cartesian epistem o logy and 
its repres ent a tion al ist triadic struc ture of 
words, knowers and things by assert ing
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTIMAGE 
speciﬁ c data related to, for instance, 
motion, form or color ( Jenkin and Harris 
2009 ). If the cortical areas are over lap ping/
inter act ing, at no point of this compu ta-
tion of visual data are there ‘stable visual 
entit ies’. 
 With the concept of ‘image’ dissolv ing 
under the assault of neur os cientiﬁ c discov-
er ies and advances in machine vision, there 
are only two possible responses by image 
theory: either to abandon the concept (and 
thus the discip line) or to radic ally enlarge 
its deﬁ n i tion/scope. Consider the second 
option and a very large deﬁ n i tion of the 
image as the rela tion of data and of 
algorithms that are engaged in an oper a tion, 
which involves visual data or data visu al iz a-
tion. Let us examine this new deﬁ n i tion of 
the image in the light of robot vision. 
Robots, remotely controlled or autonom ous, 
make use of images and imaging at many 
levels: at the level of orient a tion/navig a tion, 
at the level of survey and mapping, and at 
the level of data integ ra tion and visu al iz a-
tion.  SLAM  (Simultaneous Localization 
and Mapping), for instance, allows the 
gener a tion of a map of unknown territ ory 
using odometry (posi tion estim a tion using 
motion sensors), laser scan ning and sonar 
sensors. Hyperspectral Imaging captures a 
much larger visual spec trum than tradi-
tional optical instru ments; it allows the 
build ing of an image consti tuted of as many 
layers as frequency bands and thus, the 
char ac ter iz a tion/clas si ﬁ c a tion of the objects 
in the scene based on their spec tral prop er-
ties. Multisensor Data Fusion allows the 
merging of data captured by diﬀ er ent 
sensors or agents of a given system, and 
Distributed Consensus Algorithms enable 
decisions to be reached among collab or at-
ing vehicles oper at ing on the ground, in 
the air, on the water, under wa ter or even 
in space. 
 In short: the robot’s eye is a complex 
inter play of sensors, sensor data, control 
 POSTIMAGE  
 Digitalization has brought a new dimen-
sion to the ‘photo graphic paradigm of the 
image’ ( Hoelzl and Marie 2015 ) which was 
forged in the ﬁ ft eenth century with the 
inven tion of linear perspect ive and resul-
ted in the forced conver gence of vision and 
repres ent a tion based on the hypo thesis of 
their commen sur ab il ity. On today’s digital 
screens, that is, on the level of visual 
percep tion, the photo graphic paradigm 
seems to remain intact, but behind the 
screen, on the compu ta tional level, the 
power ful algorithms that under lie today’s 
image processing and display – such as the 
ones used to smoothly navig ate distant 
Google Street View panor a mas or the 
ubiquit ous  JPEG decom pres sion codec – 
impose a new, ‘algorithmic paradigm of the 
image’ (ibid.). 
 Behind the on- screen illu sion of a 
‘hardim age’ – a solid repres ent a tion of a 
solid world – the algorithmic image that I 
call ‘soft im age’ is not only malle able, i.e. 
inﬁ n itely recom put able, but is itself 
program (or part of a program). In fact, the 
algorithmic paradigm brings with it the 
scat ter ing of both image and vision into a 
multi pli city of data. Th is becomes evident 
in the current devel op ments of machine 
vision, where imaging is neces sary to carry 
out an action (think of assembly robots, 
drones, self- driving cars, auto matic border 
controls etc.) and where video cameras are 
asso ci ated to other sensors. Th ese sensors 
furnish various data (visuals, sound, heat, 
move ment, biomet rics etc.) that need to be 
processed, correl ated, fused and matched 
with a data base, before human control lers 
(or the control program of autonom ous 
machines/systems) can take a decision/
action. Likewise, in current neur os cientiﬁ c 
research, human vision is modelled as a 
process taking place along special ized 
cortical areas, with each area comput ing
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
sensing is distrib uted yet coordin ated ( con- 
sensus )  within a given swarm, pack, herd 
( Elkins and Fiorentini 2017 ;  Haraway 
2015a ). Posthuman vision, on the contrary, 
is a collab or at ive vision distrib uted  across 
species , that is, between machines/robots 
and humans/animals and any inter me di-
ary forms (cyborgs, bioma chines etc.) and 
the postim age comes to be deﬁ ned as 
the collab or a tion of  vision ing humans/
animals, data/algorithms and, increas ingly, 
autonom ous machines. 
 See 
also 
Algorithm; 
 AI 
(Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence); Art; Computational Turn; 
Critical Posthuman Th eory; Non-Human 
Agency; 
Robophilosophy; 
Digital 
Philosophy. 
 Note 
 1. 
Of partic u lar relev ance here is Rosi 
Braidotti’s new mater i al ist posthu man ism 
focus ing 
on 
post- anthro po centrism 
(becom ing animal/ earth/ machine) and 
her neovi tal ist concept of  zoe as ‘life in its 
nonhu man aspects’ (2013: 66) which 
encom passes even death. Also relev ant 
are Donna Haraway’s ( 2008 ) and Brian 
Massumi’s ( 2015a ) invest ig a tions of aﬀ ect 
and anim al ity as trans versal to the animal/
human, Bernard Stiegler’s concept of 
‘trans- indi vidu ation’ (2007), which he 
borrows from George Simondon (2005), 
and Simondon’s ( 1958 ) theory of the 
image as acquir ing autonom ous agency as 
it is trans mit ted from one indi vidual to 
the other.  
 Ingrid Hoelzl 
 POSTMEDIEVAL  
 In 1995, the inter na tional confer ence 
‘Cultural Frictions: Medieval Cultural 
Studies in Post- modern Contexts’ was held 
algorithms, actu at ors, vehicles and, until 
fully autonom ous systems are oper at ive, 
pilots, payload oper at ors and image analysts, 
control lers and command ers ( Chamayou 
2015 ;  Gregory 2011 ). Th e image, then, is 
not only the rela tion between data and 
algorithms in an operation involving visual 
data or data visualization, but also the rela-
tion between human and non- human agents 
of a process involving an element of ‘vision’. 
 But, given the rush towards autonomy 
of machines we will be more and more, as 
Rosi Braidotti has put it, ‘confron ted with a 
new situ ation, which makes human inter-
ven tion rather peri pheral if not completely 
irrel ev ant’ 
(2013: 
43–4). 
Th e 
total 
autonomy of robots endowed with sensing/
imaging capa cit ies brings into ques tion 
the fate of the image as a funda mental 
compon ent of human ity. Moreover, the 
passage from human vision assisted by 
robots to fully autonom ous robotic vision 
is at the core of what has been called a 
‘robolu tion’ or the replace ment of man by 
machines. ‘Vision machines’, as Paul Virilio 
calls them, will not only be endowed with 
vision, but also with cogni tion, discern-
ment, decision, and action. Th ey will thus 
be intel li gent and autonom ous beings, 
similar to humans. Eventually, vision 
machines will func tion as ‘a kind of mech-
an ized imagin ary from which, this time, 
we would be totally excluded’ (1994: 66). 
 Yet there is another, more optim istic way 
of envi sion ing the future of the image, a 
future that I will call the postim age and that 
can be formu lated only in the frame work 
of posthu man(ist) theory where humans, 
tech no lo gies and nature are no longer seen 
as separ ate (or even antag on istic) but as co- 
evolving. 1 With regard to the devel op ment 
of autonom ous robots towards collab or a-
tion, I posit that the postim age is (or will be) 
not an object ive (photo graphic) or subject-
ive (human- centred) image, but a collab or-
at ive image. With gregari ous animals,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
POSTMEDIEVAL 
‘crit ical human isms’, as well as to develop a 
more present- minded premod ern studies. 
 Medieval cultural studies – also known 
as studies in medi ev al ism or medi ev al ism 
studies – have been concerned, in fact, with 
the recep tion and repres ent a tion of the 
Middle Ages across various periods, genres 
and media, as well as with all of the ways in 
which the Middle Ages have been  inven ted 
and  construc ted by writers and schol ars from 
the Renaissance forward, and with the gene-
a lo gies of the profes sional  academic discip-
line of medi eval studies, which is oft en at 
pains to distin guish itself from a ‘medi ev al-
ism’ believed to not be concerned enough 
with a so- called ‘real’ medi eval history. 
 Th e ques tion of the alter it ism of the 
medi eval past is crit ical here because, for 
schol ars working in the vein of tradi tional 
histor icism, the Middle Ages is always 
‘other’ to the present, whereas for some 
schol ars working in studies in medi ev al-
ism ‘the medi eval’ (whatever that might 
ulti mately mean) is always partly a func-
tion, product and  eﬀ ect of any partic u lar 
present trying to grapple with the epistem-
o lo gies of the Middle Ages as well as with 
its rela tion (or supposed non- rela tion) to 
the modern and post mod ern ( Joy 2009 ). 
Studies in medi ev al ism thus demon strate 
the always inter sect ing traject or ies of the 
medi eval, modern and post mod ern and 
also reveal the ways in which the academic 
ﬁ eld of medi eval studies is itself a form of 
medi ev al ism, for in medi eval studies it is 
always a repres ent a tion of the Middle Ages 
that is being construc ted, as opposed to 
deliv er ing some sort of medi eval pres ence. 
 It is in this vein that the  BABEL 
Working Group and more speciﬁ c ally 
Eileen Joy founded  postme di eval: a journal 
of medi eval cultural studies in 2009. 
 postme di eval is a cross- discip lin ary, peer- 
reviewed journal in medi eval studies that 
aims to bring the medi eval and modern 
at Georgetown University in Washington 
 DC . Th e event was devoted to explor ing 
the ways in which medi eval liter ary studies 
were being recon ceived and redeﬁ ned via 
the models for social and cultural history 
developed in contem por ary work on 
cultural studies and post mod ern theory. 
One of the main aims of this confer ence 
was, in fact, to under stand what cultural 
studies could oﬀ er medi eval studies and, 
more import antly, what medi eval studies 
could oﬀ er cultural studies. Th is ground- 
break ing event was inspired by and also 
led to much signi ﬁ c ant work in medi eval 
studies 
that 
collect ively 
repres en ted 
import ant forays into medi eval cultural 
studies, such as Louise Fradenburg and 
Carla Freccero’s  Premodern Sexualities 
(1996), Fradenburg’s   Sacriﬁ ce Your Love: 
Psychoanalysis, 
Historicism, 
Chaucer 
(2001), Kathleen Biddick’s   Th e Shock of 
Medievalism (1998), Glenn Burger and 
Steven Kruger’s  Queering the Middle Ages 
(2001), Jeﬀ rey Jerome Cohen’s  Of Giants: 
Sex, Monsters, and the Middle Ages (1999) 
and  Th e Postcolonial Middle Ages (2000), 
Carolyn Dinshaw’s  Getting Medieval: 
Sexualities and Communities, Pre- and 
Postmodern 
(1999), 
Karma 
Lochrie’s 
 Heterosyncracies: Female Sexuality Before 
Normal Wasn’t (2005), and Paul Strohm’s 
 Th eory and the Premodern Text (2000). 
 Following, and wanting to build upon, 
the surge of works paving the way for the 
estab lish ment of a newly inter dis cip lin ary 
ﬁ eld of medi eval cultural studies, the 
 BABEL Working Group was founded in 
2004. As a collect ive of schol ars oper at ing 
primar ily in the ﬁ elds of medi eval and 
early modern studies, but also purpose-
fully drawing in schol ars from later periods 
and crit ical and cultural theory in North 
America, the  UK , and Australia, they have 
since been working to develop new cross- 
discip lin ary alli ances between the human-
it ies, sciences, social sciences and the arts
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
dimen sion or make the Middle Ages relev-
ant to today ( Evans, Fulton and Matthews 
2006 ). 
 Th e  BABEL Working Group has also 
estab lished inter est ing connec tions with 
prac ti tion ers 
of 
posthu man ism 
and 
posthu man it ies, which, despite the group’s 
continual evoc a tion of the import ance of 
history and histor icism in their work, 
have the tend ency to work primar ily in 
the modern and post mod ern periods – 
liter ary, histor ical, biolo gical and other wise 
– and rarely include in their projects the 
voices and thought of premod ern studies. 
Th e ﬁ rst issue of  postme di eval (2010) was 
in fact devoted to the ques tion ‘ When 
did We Become Post/Human?’  BABEL ’s 
serious invest ment in demon strat ing 
the import ant signi ﬁ c ance of the longest 
possible histor ical perspect ive to contem-
por ary ques tions, issues and prob lems, 
espe cially those that circu late around the 
vexed terms  human ,  human ism  and the 
 human it ies , has produced inter ven tions 
into contem por ary theor et ical debates 
where medi eval studies is oft en not present. 
As Eileen Joy and Anna Klosowska write 
in their Introduction to  BABEL ’s essay 
volume,  Fragments for a History of a 
Vanishing Humanism ( Seaman and Joy 
2016 ), the group ‘insists on the always 
provi sional and contin gent form a tions of 
the human, and of various human isms, 
over time, while also aiming to demon-
strate the diﬀ er ent ways these form a tions 
emerge (and also disap pear) in diﬀ er ent 
times and places, from the most ancient 
past to the most contem por ary present’. 
Further,  BABEL does not believe there 
can ever be a ‘total history’ of either the 
human or the post/human as they play 
them selves out in diﬀ er ing histor ical 
contexts. At the same time, deﬁ n ing what 
the human (or post/human) is has always 
been an ongoing, never ﬁ nished cultural 
project. 
into product ive crit ical rela tion, so as to 
develop 
a 
present- minded 
medi eval 
studies in which contem por ary events, 
issues, ideas, prob lems, objects and texts 
serve as trig gers for crit ical invest ig a tions 
of the Middle Ages. Th e new journal was 
conceived as an attempt to help to develop 
an inter- discip lin ary, cross- temporal and 
socially inter ven tion ist – and there fore, 
also publicly intel lec tual – medi eval cultural 
studies that would bring medi eval studies 
into mutu ally bene ﬁ  cial crit ical rela tions 
with schol ars working on a diverse array 
of 
post- medi eval 
subjects, 
includ ing 
crit ical theor ies that remain un- or under- 
histor icized. Its concer ted focus on the 
 ques tion of the rela tions between the 
medi eval and modern in diﬀ er ent times 
and places is seen as an oppor tun ity to 
take better stock of the diﬀ er ent roles that 
history and various processes of histor iciz-
ing have played in the shaping of various 
presents and futures. 
 postme di eval takes as a given that 
cultural studies do not comprise a uniﬁ ed 
ﬁ eld of approaches and objects, but rather 
consti tute an open ﬁ eld of inter- and 
multidiscip lin ary debate regard ing the 
mater ial, discurs ive and other rela tions 
between cultural objects, prac tices and 
insti tu tions and the realms with which 
they come into contact: history, society, 
polit ics, commerce, reli gion, glob al ism, the 
body, subjectiv ity and the like. To develop 
and prac tise a  medi eval cultural studies is 
to ask not only what longer histor ical 
perspect ives can provide to contem por ary 
cultural theor ies, but also how the Middle 
Ages – its mental it ies, social forms, culture, 
theo logy, polit ical and legal struc tures, 
ethical values and so on – inﬂ ect contem-
por ary life and thought. It also means 
under stand ing that placing ‘medi eval’ and 
‘cultural studies’ side by side is a continu-
ous provoca tion that does much more than 
simply give cultural studies a diachronic
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PRECOGNITION 
 Precognition, also known as future/second 
sight or conscious cognit ive aware ness, 
refers to a type of extra sens ory percep tion 
or para psy cho lo gical ability to see future 
events in the present. Precognition, or the 
anec dotal claim of ‘fortune telling’, has 
occurred through out human history and 
is thought to elicit cognit ive reas on ing to 
inter pret 
subject ive 
sensory 
inputs 
( Honorton and Ferrari 1989 ). Here, the 
indi vidual gains recep tion of sensory 
inform a tion through a trans- temporal 
oper a tion of the mind, outside of recog-
nized phys ical senses. In para psy cho logy 
circles, precog ni tion is more than just time 
travel. It is considered the non- infer en tial 
predic tion of future events. 
 It is inter est ing that para psy cho logy 
developed in the nine teenth century out of 
attempts to scien tiﬁ c ally invest ig ate the 
survival of conscious ness aft er bodily death, 
as precog nit ive processes reside on the peri-
phery of present lived exper i ence by cap tur-
ing unknow able futures, or the sublime, to 
put it in Kantian terms. In this regard, precog-
ni tion is diﬃ   cult to measure, because it is 
mostly deﬁ ned by what it is not: a conclus ive 
or scien tiﬁ c ally veri ﬁ  able phenomenon. 
Precognition, like other para psy cho lo gical 
events, lacks scientiﬁ c theory or tech nique to 
support extra sens ory occur rence, and as such 
is aligned with super sti tion, irra tion al ity or a 
super nat ural 
or 
spec u lat ive 
caus al ity 
( Th albourne and Storm 2012 ). Th albourne 
and Storm argue that under ly ing precog ni-
tion is a psycho lo gical trait known as 
 translimin al ity , or the tend ency for psycho lo-
gical mater ial such as imagery, ideation, aﬀ ect 
and percep tion to cross thresholds into or out 
of conscious ness that makes one more sens it-
ive to mystical exper i ence. Translimin al ity, 
however, ﬁ nds deeper reson ances with the 
posthu man as it consti tutes both uncon scious 
and envir on mental mater ial. 
 Th rough  postme di eval , as well as a 
special issue of the  Journal of Narrative 
Th eory devoted to ‘Premodern to Modern 
Humanisms’ ( Joy and Neufeld 2007 ), and 
also their most recent essay volume, 
 Fragments for a History of a Vanishing 
Humanism ( Seaman and Joy 2016 ), the 
members of  BABEL are concerned with 
making new and provoc at ive connec tions 
between histor ies, ideas, cultural arte facts, 
discourses and texts that have tradi tion ally 
been perceived to be too dispar ate from 
each other to be brought into product ive 
rela tion. By doing so, they engage with 
schol ars working in all periods over the 
 ques tion of peri od iz a tion itself and of the 
ways in which the produc tion of discip lin-
ary know ledges is bound up with histor ical 
chro no lo gies and tele olo gies that have 
become sedi men ted  over time . By prob-
lem at iz ing these tele olo gies and working 
toward innov at ive modes of temporal 
think ing,  postme di eval is promot ing the 
produc tion of new crit ical theor ies for 
better under stand ing the rela tions between 
past, present and future. For, as Eileen Joy 
and Craig Dionne note at the end of their 
Introduction to the ﬁ rst issue of the 
journal, ‘What might be at stake here is 
not only the future of the human itself, 
but also of the human it ies’ (2010: 7). Th e 
cross- discip lin ar ity 
promoted 
by 
the 
 BABEL  Working Group through their 
 post me di eval journal (and other publish-
ing projects that take up the themes of the 
post me dieval) can ward oﬀ  the current 
crisis of the human it ies – with depart-
ments closed, combined or oft en impaired 
by reduc tions in hires, courses and faculty 
lines – that is threat en ing to lead to their 
near extinc tion. 
 See 
also 
 Metamodernism; 
Postdisci-
plinarity; Critical Posthumanism. 
 Eileen A. Joy
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
onto present circum stances. However, as 
Aristotle reminds us, caus al ity exists not 
only as such, but must also be rooted in a 
theory of causal rela tion ships. 
 Following cognit ive social psycho logy 
in its pursuit to access cognit ive and aﬀ ect-
ive processes, para psy cho lo gical study uses 
expli cit methods, such as forced- choice 
guess ing. Th is ﬁ eld also prefers more 
indir ect and sublim inal stimuli to measure 
psycho lo gical responses (see  Radin 1997 ) 
and to expand beyond the bound ar ies of 
anthro po centric know ledge. Many para-
psy cho lo gical tests are modi ﬁ c a tions of 
well- estab lished 
psycho lo gical 
eﬀ ects, 
admin istered in reverse so that test subject 
responses are collec ted before rather than 
aft er the stim u lus event. Instead of sever-
ing a link between cause and eﬀ ect these 
tests pose new ques tions towards the 
meth od o lo gical valid ity of non- repeat able 
outcomes (ibid.). 
 In this way, scientiﬁ c invest ig a tion of 
precog ni tion is complic ated by the general 
claim of precog nit ive assump tion: that 
subject ive modes of dura tion are abstrac-
ted from the capa city of non- phys ical 
residua, as J. W. Dunne calls it, or, as he 
explains, of precog nit ive dreams: ‘in every 
happen ing with which our sensory nerves 
as asso ci ated, we ﬁ nd, aft er we have 
abstrac ted there from every known or 
imagin able phys ical compon ent, certain 
categor ic ally non- phys ical  residua . But 
these remnants are the most obtrus ive 
things in our universe’ (as quoted in 
 Ikoniadou 2014 : 72, emphasis in original). 
 Here, Dunne makes expli cit the 
problem of anom al ous phenom ena, what 
he calls ‘pre- cogni tions’, and the tensions 
that remain when the body is (dis)oriented 
by the nonlin ear ity of time and physics. 
Although these ampli ﬁ c a tions of percep-
tion are believed to exist at levels of cogni-
tion deeper than scientiﬁ c enquiry will 
allow, the domain of the unknow able, or in 
 Nonetheless, Immanuel Kant, in his 
reﬂ ec tion ‘An Answer to the Question: What 
is Enlightenment?’, expresses disagree ment 
with an ‘inab il ity to use one’s own under-
stand ing without the guid ance of another’ 
(1991: 54). For Kant, anthro po centrism 
is central and to under take an under stand-
ing of the envir on ment as external to one’s 
own intel lect, or perceived dura tion, is to 
deny the system atic know ledge of nature 
and to circum vent the author ity of reason. 
In this way, modes of super sti tion or mysti-
cism are in line with a self- incurred  imma-
tur ity that fore closes a more complete and 
fulﬁ lled human exper i ence. As with Kant, 
cognit ive scient ists posi tion the contin-
gency of the para psy cho lo gical as part of a 
larger ecology of scientiﬁ c know ledge yet to 
be discovered. 
 Critics of para psy cho logy also argue 
that invest ig a tion into the rela tion between 
conscious ness and reality is far more likely 
to result in insights when groun ded in 
scientiﬁ c theory. For instance, James 
Alcock ( 1987 ) writes that para psy cho lo-
gical activ it ies are unsus tain able in that 
there is no subject matter around which 
science can develop a clear and reas on able, 
and thus falsiﬁ  able, under stand ing. Th e 
author sees the ‘anything goes’ atti tude of 
para psy cho lo gical activ ity as provid ing no 
further explan a tion of scientiﬁ c insight 
than the search for nonma terial aspects of 
human exist ence. 
 Th is may be the case if we are to accept 
that precog nit ive processes are not merely 
unex plained phenom ena, but relate to 
condi tions under ly ing their authen ti city 
(or detec tion) ( Honorton and Ferrari 
1989 ). Yet, by relying on scientiﬁ c limit a-
tion, the phenom ena run counter to prin-
ciples of caus al ity that assume essen tial 
roles in making sense of the world around 
us. An uneas i ness emerges here despite 
anec dotal evid ence that suggests indi vidu-
als have the ability to fold future events
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PRECOGNITION 
2011 ). What precog ni tion demands of the 
body is an a- tempor al ity, a quantum exist-
ence within two simul tan eous points in 
time. Th is distrib uted body at once seems 
separ ated from nature into the removed 
depths of cogni tion, situ at ing the body 
simul tan eously within the real and the 
abstract. Th e one is a posi tion ing, an empir-
ical ﬁ eld of vision, in contrast to the latter 
which resides in excess of cogni tion – 
similar to  XXXXX ’s reading of Descartes’ 
search for scientiﬁ c consist ency and his 
confront a tion with the inab il ity to distin-
guish dreams from reality, leaving much to 
cling onto in terms of the excess of substance 
or the resid uals of subject ive exper i ence of 
conscious ness ( XXXXX  2006 ). 
 Following 
Descartes, 
the 
tension 
between these modes of exist ence and how 
we consider their rela tion with the future, 
past and present depends on the formu la-
tion of the problem of the real: if future 
feeling can be tested or replic ated then it 
consti tutes the real; and if the exper i ence 
alludes scientiﬁ c measure then it resides in 
the incon sequen tial. Within this frame-
work the future becomes some thing 
empir ic ally commanded or grasped. How-
ever, what remains is what Ryan Bishop 
( 2011 ) terms a ‘confu sion of the sensorium’, 
or the point at which the disor i ent a tion 
of Cartesian distinc tion between science 
and nature, mind and matter and so on 
converges into a strata of indis tin guish able 
and incom pre hens ible rela tions that super-
sede the gener al iz a tion of the real. 
 Nonetheless, Brian Massumi ( 2002 ) has 
fruit fully illus trated that the conven tional 
meaning or the content of any inter sub-
ject ive context is never neatly placed by the 
quality or intens ity of that exper i ence. 
Th ere is no cohe sion or consist ency 
between the two, and if there is, as Massumi 
writes, ‘it is of another nature.’ Contrary to 
empir ical assess ments which require an 
orient a tion that is quan ti ﬁ  able as real, it 
some cases the spir itual, is diﬃ   cult to deny 
( Kennedy 2005 ). However, it would do us 
well to consider that the abstrac tions of 
our vast non- linear world are arte facts of 
discov ery and inter pret a tion in as much as 
they are not bound by phys ical laws, 
language, concept or limit. Instead, discov-
ery is gener al ized as a type of trans fer of 
sensa tion in the reorder ing of reality, not 
as valid a tion of pre- consti tuted forms of 
exist ence. Precognition is the evap or a tion 
of past, present and future into new work-
able modes of under stand ing though the 
unknown. 
 More so, Daryl Bem ( 2011 ) argues that 
fore know ledge does not just note the 
process of reason, but is an anom al ous 
process of inform a tion or energy trans fer 
that is unex plained in terms of known 
phys ical or biolo gical mech an isms. For 
this reason evid en tiary modes of know-
ledge produc tion should be exten ded into 
realms that are not  a priori under stood, but 
medi ated through embod ied exper i ence. 
As Bem states, anti cip a tion of future event, 
or knowing the unknow able, ‘would be 
evol u tion ar ily advant age ous for repro duc-
tion and survival if the organ ism could act 
instru ment ally to approach erotic stimuli 
and avoid negat ive stimuli’ (2011: 6). Yet, 
despite the stat ist ic ally signi ﬁ c ant produc-
tion of Bem’s correl a tions, empir ical theor-
ies of the precog nit ive do not extend far 
enough in terms of describ ing the embod-
ied exper i ence of abstrac tion. 
 In this way, precog ni tion is not merely a 
sensa tion at the level of the mental in terms 
of human thought but resembles a synaes-
thesia against commonly held divi sions 
between human mind and body or body 
and non- human extern al ity ( Bishop 2011 ). 
What remains is an exper i ment a tion in the 
senses, and in the way we relate to how we 
see the world through spatio- temporal 
sens it iv it ies. Aft er all, believ ing in the world 
is ulti mately believ ing in the body ( Hughes
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
PREGNANT POSTHUMAN, THE
to prove the system wrong? I’ve got an 
open mind, if you want to talk about it.’ 
 See also Aﬀ ective Turn; Multiverse; 
Sensing Practices. 
 Ramon Amaro 
 PREGNANT POSTHUMAN, THE  
 A New Philosophical Subject 
 We need new concepts of the subject to 
devise new ethical, social and discurs ive 
schemes in our time of profound trans form-
a tion to be able to think new epistem o lo gies 
and onto lo gies together. We need to follow 
the lines where speciﬁ c situ ated subjects lead 
us in order to ﬁ nd new ways of being (post)
human  with  the world ( Braidotti 2013 ). 
 Here, the Pregnant Posthuman presents 
herself – she is a subject who intu it ively and 
intim ately under stands change and becom-
ing, one who captures the move ments of 
matter and the borders of life within herself. 
 * 
 Th e bird in my chest may or may not be 
mine. Something feral led her to me. A bit of 
uncooked egg, perhaps, and now my body is 
never still . . . My sparrow’s wings brush my 
belly, a message meant for the sky.   
  Carol Guess and Kelly Magee, 
 With Animal 
 Th e Pregnant Posthuman is the daugh ter 
of Donna Haraway’s cyborg and Rosi 
Braidotti’s posthu man, of Lyotard’s ‘she’, the 
inhuman femin ine philo sopher, as well as 
Hannah Arendt’s natal subject. Being a(n) 
(un)dutiful daugh ter of her mothers, she 
presents herself as an image, a ﬁ ction, a 
stand point, a reality. She is a singu lar 
subject, but inside her subjectiv ity there is 
another subject growing, one that nobody 
can see yet. She is in a singu lar plural state 
and in intim ate exper i ence with the new, 
serves us well to consider a rela tion ship 
with the para psychotic as semantic ally or 
semi ot ic ally disordered. But this is not to 
lay a negat ive found a tion on the unex-
plained, merely to state that the precog -
nit ive process does not ﬁ x distinc tion. It 
relies on its own displace ment to draw 
future feeling into an ampli ﬁ c a tion of 
present senses of reality. It connects the 
indis tin guish able, the unknow able, with a 
rela tion to the embod ied exper i ence. 
 However, before collapsing that which 
exceeds meas ure ment with a ﬁ gur a tion of 
such embod i ment we must ﬁ rst recog nize 
the paradox imme di ately revealed through 
the separ ate ness of cogni tion and foresight. 
For while the former captures sensory 
inform a tion, the latter enables a diﬀ er ence in 
perceived outcome. In this way, qual i ﬁ c a tion 
or valid a tion runs contrary to any concep-
tion of embod ied inde pend ence from dura-
tion. Th e human body is tempor ally located 
within the gap of present and future (and 
past) only inas much as it is a sensa tion, a 
feed back, of gener al iz able inform a tion artic-
u lated as perceived cognit ive outcome. 
 Th e resid ual, the real meaning, of this 
process of knowing is motiv ated by the 
precog nit ive, where a greater mode of 
exist ence draws upon the freedoms that lie 
within the power to decide what consti-
tutes the problem of the real ( Deleuze and 
Guattari 1991 ;  Deleuze 2013 ). As Deleuze 
states, the essence of this problem is no 
longer reason, but thought, which is not 
restric ted to human entit ies and itself is ‘to 
think and create’ ( Hughes 2011 : 90). Here, 
in extent of dura tion is an aspect of precog-
ni tion that deﬁ nes the real through doing, 
rescript ing and becom ing – a meth od o -
lo gical tool of the subject ive, captured 
but not prede ter mined. Philip K. Dick 
summar izes it best in  Minority Report 
(2002: 15) during the inter rog a tion of his 
precog nit ive proponent turned empir ical 
victim, John Anderton: ‘Were you hoping
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PREGNANT POSTHUMAN, THE 
partic u lar. I am an attempt at ﬁ nding 
words for some thing plural, at ﬁ nding 
meaning within a posi tion that is still only 
produ cing silence, is still forgot ten, 
unmasked. I am a reach ing- out towards 
my reality and a trying- to-understand the 
world from my point of exist ence which I 
imman ently exceed. I am the repres sion 
that inscribes me and the possib il it ies that 
I open up. I will be a site for crit ical reﬂ ec-
tion and, because my child is yet unknown, 
for radical imagin a tion. 
 I am here product ively, produ cing 
some thing other than myself, produ cing a 
stranger in myself, produ cing my in- 
human in myself, care fully, quietly, in a 
constant state of waiting, making room. 
But it is not my child who is my work, it is 
not this subjectity ( Nancy and Lacoue-
Labarthe 1992 ) that I am that is my work, 
no, this is only ‘before’ the work, this is only 
the posi tion that sets me to work, it is this 
state of not knowing what is catch ing my 
breath that urges me to think. I could never 
think without a body. Never without my 
preg nancy. I talk to my child. Nobody 
knows what I said – I know our dialogue 
exists, but do the words? 
 I have an unstop pable wish and duty to 
inter pret every kick, every move ment, 
every sign of growth. Pregnancy isn’t a 
moment, it is waiting until some thing 
forms within me and while I am waiting 
my think ing evolves and changes around 
it. Th e growing matter determ ines my 
exper i ence, my future, my life. Pregnancy 
is between an act and a state, it is conscious 
and uncon scious within an intim ate 
involve ment with the world to come.  Being 
with child is being with the always not- yet 
of the world. It is the search for the world 
aft er the promise of engage ment, aft er the 
aﬃ  rm at ive choice for the world. 
 According to the New Materialism of 
Karen Barad, Donna Haraway and Rosi 
Braidotti, matter or being is not only 
the rela tional , plur al ity . She is the ﬁ rst 
philo soph ical subject capable of carry ing, 
of giving birth. 
 With the present a tion of this new 
subject, there is a change in focus from the 
natal ity of the indi vidual human being, to 
the possib il ity of giving birth to another 
human being. More plainly, this could also 
be pointed out as a change of focus from 
the all too domin ant mascu line child to the 
mother. Birth is the forgot ten or uncon-
scious mark of the begin ning of a linear 
indi vidual life, while preg nancy, the 
upcom ing event of birth and the possib il-
ity of giving birth, func tion as the found a-
tion of the new life in the middle of a 
human life, in the body of a conscious 
subject. With this switch in focus, the 
subject becomes inter sub ject ive, embed-
ded and cyclical rather than linear,  Bildung 
orient ated 
and 
separ ated 
from 
its 
surround ings by its believed univer sal ity. If 
the human condi tion is one of natal ity, the 
posthu man condi tion is one of preg nancy. 
 Th e deep rela tion al ity of this state 
captures also, or fore most, the rela tion to 
the yet unknown, because the promise of 
engage ment of the Pregnant Posthuman to 
what she is carry ing is always made before 
birth. If the human istic subject is about 
being a singu lar progress ive ration al ity, 
then the Pregnant Posthuman is about 
being two unknown diﬀ er ences. Aft er all, 
‘singu lar ity does not hold life in unyield ing 
devo tion to it’ ( Wolfe 1929 ). It is about 
being repe ti tion of the body, to make it 
anew again and again within the borders of 
one body and thus imman ently trans gress 
them, and this is where thought which is 
neither sheer ration al ity nor emotion al ity, 
nor only subject or object orient ated, can 
emerge as the embod ied and embed ded 
fruit of the not- yet and the in- between. 
 * * * 
 I am neither ﬁ ction nor reality, neither 
meaning nor silence, neither univer sal nor
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
PREGNANT POSTHUMAN, THE
Some have called it the sacred, the soul, but 
they don’t force us to radic ally engage. 
Th ey don’t ask for care or carry ing. Th ey 
are not matter. Th ey don’t surpass classic 
correl a tion ism and the anthro po centrism 
that comes with it; they conﬁ rm it. In my 
case, the in- human, the place where I 
exceed myself, is the growth of the world 
inside of me, it is the growth of my child 
whom I do not yet know but to whom I 
promise my whole being. Th is is the point 
in my subjectity where I am absent, where 
there is only the pres ence of the other. 
It is exactly this part that doesn’t belong 
to myself that makes me human. It is 
this carry ing which enforces me to take 
respons ib il ity over the future and engages 
me with the world- to-come in the depths 
of my being, in the dark ness of my ﬂ esh. It 
is this which resists the absurd, the suicide, 
the exist en tial fall. 
 With each child I produce, I sacri ﬁ ce 
and consti tute myself. I am the synthesis of 
diﬀ er ence and repe ti tion, because my 
repe ti tion, my being preg nant again, is 
always a diﬀ er en ti ation of a new life. I am 
with . . . child . . . matter . . . ﬁ sh . . . crisis . . . 
failure . . . unknown . . . other . . . not- yet. I 
capture the move ment of new mater i al ism 
right inside of me: the aﬀ ec tion ate, 
intim ate rela tion with matter, with objects 
that determ ine who I become, maybe even 
more than I am able to determ ine their 
becom ings, I live inside their history as 
they live inside of me. It is this move ment, 
this network, of trying to know and being, 
of knowing in being, that I present on the 
proud throne of my pelvis: gene a lo gical, 
gener a tional, gest a tional thought. 
 When I produce, I wait. When I produce 
another, I become. I am the inﬁ n ite post-
pone ment of getting to know what I carry, 
of getting to know the matter  an sich . 
 I am plural. I care because I carry. And I 
am preg nant only aft er world, only aft er 
desire, only aft er love. 
subsumed to think ing, like it still is in the 
work of Bruno Latour or Michel Foucault, 
but epistem o logy and onto logy are radic ally 
inter twined. It is the same with me; my 
circum stances do not only aﬀ ec tion ate me, 
they are swim ming into my belly, I am ‘a 
folding in of external inﬂ u ences and a 
simul tan eous unfold ing outward of eﬀ ects’ 
( Braidotti 2013 ). From inside my uterus 
they change my body, my blood, my 
hormone levels, my thought, my being, 
some times care fully, suddenly. Th e dance 
with unfold ing matter takes place inside of 
me. I am embed ded, perform at ive and being 
performed by. I expect, believe and aﬃ  rm in 
a manner in which the clas sical subject of 
human ism is not able to – there is some-
thing that expects itself through me. Th ere is 
a tree growing inside of me, a dragon, a 
whole city, global warming. Correlationism 
turned imman ent and became my fertil ity. 
 I am not language yet, it has never 
bothered to capture my meaning. I will 
invent my words, my sentences, my 
discourse, in time. I am neither culture nor 
matter. I am a radical continuum of both. I 
rise from the alleys of human ism to claim 
my part. I am the radical other of philo-
sophy ( Irigaray 1985a ). I am the subject 
who is related to everything that is uncanny 
in human ism. I am the abject of human-
ism, in my bloody mater i al ity as well as in 
philo soph ical thought where I am only a 
ﬂ eshy origin and shadow. I will never be 
One or a whole, but always more, always 
too much, always frag men ted. It is not my 
aim to be the centre of the world. Because 
of my preg nant state this seems not merely 
an illu sion but a funda mental impossib il ity. 
 An animal is growing, or a tree, a lamp, 
an artwork, or just merely matter, some-
where so deep that I cannot reach it, so 
personal that it has become imper sonal, 
some thing not or not- yet human. Th e 
inhuman is some thing in the struc ture of 
the human that stretches beyond itself.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PROCESS ONTOLOGIES 
not be confused with uniform ity. Process 
onto lo gies are plur al ist, but not through 
a number of discrete indi vidu als or cate-
gor ies or classes or essences. Instead, pro-
cess onto logy is a diﬀ er en tial plur al ism, 
that is, a plur al ism of chan ging degrees or 
intens it ies among many connec ted pro-
cesses of becom ing. For instance, diﬀ er ent 
intens it ies of feeling allow Whitehead to 
distin guish events from one another with-
out treat ing them as separ ate substances. 
Instead of a reality consti tuted by many 
inde pend ent things, distrib uted accord ing 
to essences, substances and species, process 
onto logy describes a reality of inter linked 
processes that cross bound ar ies between 
categor ies. 
 Process onto lo gies are a minor line in 
the history of philo sophy, where the major 
line is repres en ted by the search for stable 
and self- identical substances rather than 
ﬂ ux. Th e archetypal thinker for the 
substance line is Aristotle and the most 
inﬂ u en tial recent philo sopher of process is 
Whitehead. In the follow ing pairs of 
thinkers, the ﬁ rst repres ent diﬀ er ent kinds 
of process philo sophy, the second diﬀ er ent 
kinds of substance and iden tity philo-
sophy: Heraclitus–Parmenides; Leibniz–
Descartes; Hume–Kant; Bergson–Russell; 
Deleuze–Quine. 
 Diﬀ erences between these lines are 
philo soph ical and logical, based around 
the argu ment that there must be some 
kind of endur ing substance as support 
for judge ments, prop er ties and actions. 
Whitehead called this argu ment the fallacy 
of misplaced concrete ness, because it 
mistakenly attrib uted causal eﬃ   ciency to 
substance, when in fact processes were the 
correct explan a tion for change. Th e oppos-
i tion also plays out accord ing to diﬀ er ent 
views of physics, chem istry and biology, 
around whether the sciences conﬁ rm the 
exist ence of indi vidual entit ies such as 
 See 
also  
Feminicity; 
Feminist 
Posthumanities; 
In-human, 
the; 
Joy; 
Mattering; Material Feminisms; Neo/New 
Materialism; Posthuman Critical Th eory; 
Posthuman 
Ethics; 
Placenta 
Politics; 
Posthumanist Performativity; Pill, the; 
Posthuman Sexuality. 
 Rodante van der Waal 
 PROCESS ONTOLOGIES  
 Process onto lo gies deny the prior ity of 
being over becom ing, the prior ity of 
unchan ging substance over change. Th ey 
claim that reality is process rather than 
static exist ence and they claim that 
substances should give way to events. 
Process onto lo gies also deny the real exist-
ence of isol ated indi vidu als and they 
replace 
them 
with 
multi pli cit ies 
of 
processes. Static beings are there fore 
redeﬁ ned as illu sions imposed over 
dynamic events and trans form a tions. For 
example, for process onto lo gies a substance 
deﬁ ned as a stable iden tity over time is 
really an event deﬁ ned as the coming 
together of many trans form a tions. 
 As opposed to philo sophies of tran-
scend ence, where exist ence is divided into 
diﬀ er ent realms with one ruling over the 
other, process onto lo gies favour the idea of 
imman ence, where all events share the same 
realm. For process onto logy, all real 
processes inter act with one another on the 
same complex plane and there are no beings 
or processes that can claim inde pend ence 
from that plane, or special domin ion over it. 
Process onto logy is concrete rather than 
ideal ist onto logy, if by ideal ism we under-
stand belief in an inde pend ent sphere for 
ideas. Th is does not mean that ideas are 
denied, but rather that they func tion as 
processes rather than as abstract entit ies.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 In human isms, bound ar ies are described 
between human and animal, or human and 
plant life, or human and inert tech no logy, 
in order to preserve the special status of 
human ity. Process onto lo gies discard these 
bound ar ies and emphas ize the shared 
events that make for human–animal and 
human–tech no logy assemblages. Th ere are 
diﬀ er ent intens it ies of processes across the 
human and animal. Th ey work together 
such that an exclus ive human ism cannot be 
enter tained. For example, Donna Haraway 
describes the rela tion of human and animal 
as ‘a knot of species co- shaping one another 
in layers of recip roc at ing complex ity’ 
( Haraway 2008 : 42). 
 Since stabil ity is only ever relat ive for 
process onto lo gies, the idea of an inde-
pend ent and stable human life is not 
consist ent with the view of inter re lated 
processes. Th e idea of human ﬁ nitude, 
import ant for exist en tial ist ideas of death 
and human special ness, is replaced by 
many processes extend ing beyond the 
limits of an indi vidual human life, body or 
mind. Many lives and processes continue 
beyond each human death, extend ing in 
ways that refute theor ies of proper limits 
for human lives. Judith A. Jones describes 
this Whiteheadian view of life in terms of 
intens ity and connec tion: ‘A creat ive 
cosmos of vibrat ory intens it ies is a 
perpetual mani fold of felt connectiv ity in 
an ever- chan ging array of worlds, and of 
poten tial contrasts where such worlds may 
be made one and rendered part of the 
perpetual many’ (1998: 211–12). 
 For process onto lo gies, ‘posthu man’ 
does not neces sar ily imply the aban don-
ment of human values or a focus on human 
bodies and minds for ethics. Ideas such as 
feeling in Whitehead or intu ition in 
Bergson allow for atten tion to the human 
body or conscious ness as processes 
extend ing outwards, but without claim ing 
an essen tial superi or ity or inde pend ence 
atoms, or processes such as emer gence. For 
example, John Dupré’s process philo sophy 
of biology focuses on biolo gical processes 
of stabil iz a tion and destabil iz a tion at the 
micro bial level, rather than on ﬁ xed iden-
tit ies of substances, species or indi vidu als. 
 American prag mat ism can be included 
in the list of process onto lo gies and Peirce, 
Dewey and James have been asso ci ated 
with more famil iar thinkers of process 
such as Bergson. Bergson intro duced the 
concepts of multi pli city and dura tion into 
process onto logy. Multiplicity is a deﬁ n i-
tion of qual it at ive plur al ism such that 
things are many due to diﬀ er ences of 
intens ity (more, less) rather than diﬀ er-
ences between count able quant it ies (one, 
two). Duration is the deﬁ n i tion of time as 
continu ous multi pli city rather than discrete 
exten sion. When time is divided into parts, 
it is no longer the same as when it is 
considered as a continu ous dura tion. Th ere 
is there fore a paral lel in process onto lo gies 
between the oppos i tion of beings and 
processes and the oppos i tion of continu ous 
multi pli cit ies and discrete parts. 
 Th ough there are many versions of 
human ism, the move ment can be deﬁ ned 
gener ally as based upon stable and ﬁ nite 
human indi vidu als sharing a common idea, 
essence, destiny, goal, reﬂ ect ive self- 
conscious ness or form. Humanism cannot 
there fore be deduced from process onto lo-
gical prin ciples. Th is is because the 
common ness required to identify the 
human is replaced by chan ging and vari-
able multi pli cit ies of becom ing across 
complex soci et ies of inter con nec ted trans-
form a tions. Process onto lo gies are there-
fore import ant for ideas of the posthu man. 
For example, for her study of the post -
hu man, Rosi Braidotti devel ops process 
concepts such as the ‘assemblage’ from 
Deleuze and Guattari and Isabelle Stengers 
devel ops her posthu man ist construct iv ism 
follow ing Whitehead, Deleuze and Guattari.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
PROCESS ONTOLOGIES 
ively) stable center of agency’ (2000: 15). In 
Rescher’s onto logy, the indi vidual human 
conscious ness, soul, iden tity, mind and 
body disap pear as inde pend ent entit ies in 
favour of exten ded processes. 
 Simple obser va tions allow us to under-
stand the extent and vari ab il ity of relat ive 
stabil ity as megapro cess in process onto lo-
gies. Take the air as it sustains you with 
oxygen, yet also intro duces harmful 
pollut ants; the much- ﬁ ltered water you 
drink; the ambient temper at ure keeping 
you alive; the clothes made thou sands 
of miles away; the language you use, 
developed by the speech of millions over 
thou sands of years; the microbes in your 
gut keeping you healthy; the tech no lo gies 
of glass, silicon, threads, manage ment, 
distri bu tion, drugs and pros thet ics. All 
are vital aspects of a relat ively stable mega-
pro cess which extends your illus ory human 
bound ar ies of body, mind, char ac ter and 
soul. You are dissolved into the multi pli-
city of the non- human, just as those non- 
human processes reach out and dissolve 
into you. 
 See 
also 
Commutation 
Ontology; 
Econtology; Metastability; Ontological 
Turn; Vibrant Matter. 
 James Williams   
for them. Process onto lo gies can be very 
close to the ethics and polit ics of some 
kinds of human ism, where posit ive values 
are asso ci ated with some qual it ies exhib-
ited by actual humans as they extend into 
the world. Th is idea of exten sion draws 
process onto logy close to theor ies in the 
philo sophy of mind drawing vari ously on 
Clark, Varela and Th ompson and describe 
mind as exten ded, embed ded, embod ied 
and enacted. 
 Th e human ism of the great poet, 
engaged 
polit ical 
activ ist, 
commit ted 
reformer and invest ig ator into human kind 
are not closed oﬀ  from process onto logy. 
Yet process onto logy will also remove the 
illus ory basis for a strong human ism, 
where the commonly deﬁ ned and repres-
en ted abstract human being is the general 
found a tion for exclus ive and bounded 
values. Process onto logy can lead to a prag-
matic anthro po centrism, though it will 
always be opposed to an ideal ist human ism 
and sens it ive to shared processes with 
animals, plants and tech no logy. 
 When reﬂ ect ing on process onto logy, 
Nicholas Rescher, whose work combines 
American prag mat ism and process philo-
sophy, explains why the ground of strong 
human ism is taken away: ‘Based on a 
process- oriented approach, the self or ego 
. . . is simply a megapro cess – a struc tured 
system of processes, a cohes ive and (relat-
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
cross- chatter of these oppos i tions tends to 
entrench and essen tial ize their mean ings 
into a polit ical hier archy of diﬀ er ence. 
 Quantum Anthropologies inter rog ates 
this oppos i tion through a counter- intu it ive 
strategy. I read the work of philo sopher, 
Jacques Derrida, in a way that radic ally 
resitu ates decon struc tion’s implic a tions 
and relev ance. Best known for his signa-
ture aphor ism ‘ il n’y a pas de hors- texte’ – 
‘there is no outside- text’ (1976: 158), 
Derrida’s asser tion appears to endorse the 
hermet icism of cultural construc tion ism, 
allow ing us no way out. However, Derrida 
consist ently railed against linguist icism as 
it is commonly conceived: ‘Th e concept of 
text or of context which guides me 
embraces and does not exclude the world, 
reality, history . . . [T]he text is not the 
book, it is not conﬁ ned in a volume itself 
conﬁ ned to the library. It does not suspend 
refer ence . . .  Diﬀ érance  is a refer ence and 
vice versa’ (1988: 137). In Derrida’s hands, 
‘language’, ‘general writing’ and ‘text’ evoke 
the work ings of an open system, and yet 
one whose appar ent exter i or ity, or what it 
appears to access, remains internal to it. 
 My contri bu tion is to rework and re -
dir ect the implic a tions of this asser tion in 
what could be described as a new mater i al-
ist inter ven tion. Th ere are several steps in 
this strategy. First, we begin with writing, 
which is regarded as a cultural phenomenon 
because histor ic ally it arrives aft er speech. 
Unlike writing, we tend to assume that 
speech is a natural ability whose mean ings 
are trans par ently avail able to us. In other 
 QUANTUM ANTHROPOLOGY  
 Th is notion is elab or ated in  Quantum 
Anthropologies: Life at Large ( Kirby 2011 ). 
As the title of the book suggests, this 
collec tion of essays explores the rela tion-
ship between scientiﬁ c themes and the 
inter pret ive enter prise in the human it ies 
and social sciences. Th e sciences are said to 
enjoy a success ful degree of access to 
mater ial reality; its objects and processes. 
In compar ison, the human it ies acknow-
ledge that ‘reality’ is in inver ted commas 
because it is a second order construct, a 
subject ive and cultur ally inﬂ ec ted process 
of inter pret a tion that inev it ably medi ates 
nature as such. Th e common- sense belief 
that sustains this oppos i tion is that nature 
is univer sal, endur ing and relat ively 
constant, whereas the object that culture 
discov ers is perceived through the hermen-
eut ics of repres ent a tion that are inev it ably 
mobile and contested. 
 What is in ques tion is the oppos i tion 
between nature and culture, as well as the 
cognate asso ci ations that appear to explain 
and justify their diﬀ er ence. Th e divi sion is 
a polit ical hier archy that equates nature 
with original deﬁ  ciency and culture with a 
later and more evolved complex ity. Th is 
same logic is at work in the body/mind 
divi sion and its sexual and gender align-
ments, in the racial discrim in a tions of 
black (ignor ance) versus white (enlight en-
ment), and even in the most found a tional 
assump tions that identify and segreg ate 
mater i al ity from ideation. Importantly, the 
 Q
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
QUANTUM ANTHROPOLOGY 
words, if we are present when someone is 
speak ing we feel we have under stood that 
person’s meaning, whereas we concede a 
level of ambi gu ity to the written word. 
However, Derrida argues that speech is 
always/already writing (1976) because 
speech is as complex, as contex tu ally alive 
and open to inter pret a tion as writing. 
 Derrida’s inter ven tion is commonly 
inter preted as one that denat ur al izes 
speech by describ ing it in terms of cultural 
complex ity, a manoeuvre that sustains the 
binary with a category correc tion. However, 
build ing on Derrida’s insist ence that 
decon struc tion does more than reverse a 
binary, I displace the oppos i tion and its 
polit ical agendas by arguing that writing 
was 
always/already 
nature 
(complex, 
system ic ally involved, entangled). In other 
words, by natur al iz ing writing, ‘no outside- 
text’ becomes ‘no outside nature’, and thus 
origin ary complex ity becomes our depar-
ture point in a revised post- human it ies. 
 If decon struc tion is not a meth od o logy 
whose only purpose is to muddle concep-
tual integ rity and to under line the human 
condi tion’s solipsism (culture), then we are 
invited to consider a meta- physis whose 
internal torsions have quantum implic a-
tions. As particle phys i cist, femin ist and 
philo sopher of science, Karen Barad 
explains it: ‘Concepts do not refer to the 
object of invest ig a tion. Rather, concepts 
in their mater ial intra- activ ity enact the 
diﬀ er en ti ated insepar ab il ity that  is a 
phenomenon’ (2010: 3). Th is way of think-
ing recon ﬁ g ures the diﬀ er ence between 
ideation and mater i al ity, culture and 
nature, and in such a way that nature, or 
reality, becomes artic u late, agen tial, and 
even cogniz ing, albeit in involved and 
oft en unanti cip ated ways. Indeed, in what 
might be described as a posthu man 
perform ativ ity, 
where 
the 
diﬀ er ence 
between subjects and objects are ‘intra- 
actively’ ( Barad 2007 : 168–72) blurred, the 
conven tional co- ordin ates of refer ence and 
loca tion are profoundly disor i ented and 
diﬀ rac ted. 
 Th e reson ance between aspects of crit-
ical theory, post- struc tur al ism and decon-
struc tion in partic u lar, are envi sioned as 
expres sions of Life’s literacies in  Quantum 
Anthropologies . Importantly, this displace-
ment of ‘who’ reads and ‘who’ authors 
discov ers a more compre hens ive sense of 
social ity 
whose 
intric a tion 
(writ ing) 
discover modes of being (onto logy) with/in 
modes 
of 
knowing 
(epistem o logy). 
According to this view, ‘textu al ity’ is a 
systemic enfold ing, always contem por ary 
and product ively alive because never closed 
oﬀ  in a past that is behind us. Consequently, 
‘texts’ are poly morph ous, such that even 
seem ingly primeval organ isms, indeed,  all 
organ isms, as well as appar ently inan im ate 
and life less entit ies such as a photon, or the 
beha viour of light ning, become subjects of 
cognit ive and agen tial entan gle ment and 
obser va tional inten tion. Quantum anthro-
po logy explores this sense of a liter ate 
‘world ing’, diﬀ ract ing the author/reader 
and recon ﬁ g ur ing the diﬀ er ence between 
subject and object, human and non- human, 
even life and non- life, in the process. 
 See also Diﬀ raction; Feminist Post-
humanities; 
Neo/New 
Materialism; 
Posthumanist Performativity. 
 Vicki Kirby
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
faintest idea what or where it is. In games 
we can be whomever we want to be and do 
what we always dreamt of. Our lives have 
been imma ter i al ized to a great extent. 
Within this medi at ized context radical 
mediocrity is a state of mind and a state of 
being. Notwithstanding infra struc tural 
immob il iz a tions like traﬃ  c jams, terror ist 
threats, tsuna mis or digital viruses, our 
mobil ity has become part of our selves. On 
a psycho lo gical level we live an ‘auto mo -
bil ized’ life. Th e very essence of global 
consumers is not freedom to think but 
freedom to move around: not autonomy 
but 
auto mobil ity. We 
have 
become 
Aristotle’s  Demiurgos : the ulti mate self 
(Greek:  autos ) mover (Latin:  mobilis ). 
 Th e instinct ive rejec tion of the qual i ﬁ c-
a tion ‘radical mediocre’ is triggered by our 
deep- rooted 
modern 
self- percep tion. 
Philosophically this is in accord with the 
Kantian deﬁ n i tion of the subject. In his 
 Critique of Pure Reason (1781) the 
autonom ous subject – the  cogito in process 
that Kant names ‘tran scend ental apper cep-
tion’ – is self- consciously equipped with an 
under stand ing that enables the subject to 
make truth ful judge ments about the world 
in order to act ration ally. Th is self- 
conscious ness is embed ded in a culture 
that appre ci ates crit ical distance and 
autonomy. Modern educa tion raises young 
people to become crit ical citizens. Yet 
instead of taking distance to reﬂ ect crit ic-
ally indi vidu als nowadays are enmeshed, 
embed ded in networks. A radical mediocre 
 RADICAL MEDIOCRITY  
 How mediocre have the lives and self- 
conscious ness of Western indi vidu als 
become? Th e sugges tion that we live an 
average life full of boring routines is 
unbear able for most western indi vidu als 
who are self- reﬂ ect ively attuned to live 
autonom ous, unique and creat ive lives. Yet, 
once we take the notion ‘mediocrity’ as 
liter ally as possible in order to upscale its 
meaning crit ic ally to a politico- economic 
level, it is hard to ignore this evident fact: 
in the third millen nium our posthu man 
condi tion is radical mediocrity; that is, all 
kinds of media and means ( medium ) rule 
(Greek:  kratein – crity) our lives and we are 
rooted (Latin:  radix, radices – root) into the 
world via screens and displays. We think we 
know everything about super novas, black 
holes, the genome,  DNA , neur o trans-
mit ters, quarks and even the Higgs boson, 
but we only deduce this from screens that 
visu al ize stat ist ics and diagrams. Kids 
nowadays are swiping screens for about ten 
hours a day. Twitter and Facebook connect 
every one to every one. 
 Life in the twenty- ﬁ rst century has 
become ecstatic: we have extern al ized our 
conscious ness in computers. Twenty- ﬁ rst-
century schiz oid man lives in virtual times 
where the time range is a split second. He 
acts as if time and space are anni hil ated as 
a result of an unima gin able accel er a tion of 
processes. Th e economy has become spec-
u lat ive with algorithms mobil iz ing the 
stock exchange. By satnav we can travel to 
 R
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
RADICAL MEDIOCRITY 
person is a node in a network, knotted into 
a web. Being a subject is the result of 
continu ous folding in and extend ing feed-
back loops. Th e concept of a rational 
subject that is able to make proper choices 
and respons ible decisions is the very 
found a tion of the modern eman cip a tion 
of all those groups that were polit ic ally 
non- exist ent before the middle of the 
nine teenth century: craft s men, labour ers, 
their wives and all those racially and sexu-
ally margin al ized groups that have gained 
civil rights in the past century. 
 Yet, exactly two centur ies later post-
mod ern, eman cip ated indi vidu als have 
gone through a process of tech no lo gical 
enlight en ment that has raised their life 
stand ards to a – glob ally speak ing – dispro-
por tion ate height. Th e average foot print of 
north- west Europeans is nearly four times 
what the earth can produce. In the course 
of modern ity inter ac tions and trans ac tions 
got speeded up. In 1981, two centur ies aft er 
Kant’s public a tion, the  TGV for the ﬁ rst 
time trans por ted people to their holiday 
resorts and busi ness confer ences in France 
by at a top speed of 381 km/h, the space 
shuttle  Columbia encircled the earth, the 
 Voyager 2 arrived at Saturn,  MTV  started 
to broad cast video clips around the clock, 
and  IBM launched its ﬁ rst personal 
computer. A year later, in 1982, the inter net 
protocol suite ( TCP / IP ) was intro duced as 
the stand ard network ing protocol and a 
decade later the World Wide Web, web 
servers, and web browsers connect poten-
tially every one on Earth. Global connectiv-
ity, described in a rhizo matic sense by 
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari in  A 
Th ousand Plateaus (1980), was a fact. By 
now every person has become a node in a 
network. Without real iz ing this trans form-
a tion, because uncrit ic ally stuck in a 
modern, inad equate discourse, twenty- 
ﬁ rst-century schiz oid man has become 
radic ally mediocre. 
 Why schiz oid? Th is posthu man condi-
tion has a tech no lo gical and a psycho lo-
gical aspect. Man and media are fully inter-
twined. Man is a techno- psycho lo gical 
being that by the second decade of the 
third millen nium has intern al ized all 
these medi ations, reor gan iz ing his life 
accord ing to the possib il it ies that these 
media produce. His basic needs are expo-
nen tially redeﬁ ned into volat ile pref er-
ences that are direc ted by the market. How 
does this second nature become ﬁ rst? In 
the western hemi sphere life has become 
very comfort able. Th is comfort able life, 
acquired in the course of 150 years, has 
become ﬁ rst nature. An iPad or iPhone 
nowadays is a primary need, as is a credit 
card and a car. Aft er the initial ‘shock’ that 
always accom pan ies the intro duc tion of a 
new medium, end users learn to handle the 
medium. Gradually they start consum ing 
the comfort, i.e. the aﬄ  u ence of ‘their’ 
media, intern al iz ing it as a basic stand ard. 
For the next gener a tion this comfort has 
become a basic dispos i tion. Th at is why 
propos ing to reduce auto mobil ity and 
discon nect from inter activ ity feels like 
being asked to mutil ate oneself: it is a crip-
pling, blind ing or dumbing inter ven tion. It 
is as if someone is asked to cut oﬀ  a healthy 
leg or pierce a well- func tion ing eye or ear. 
 Th is psycho lo gical upgrad ing is the 
result of tech no lo gical upscal ing. New 
media 
always 
incor por ate 
earlier 
developed media. A smart phone is neither 
a tele phone nor a  TV , let alone a library. It 
is a connec ted digital display that enables 
its users to be every where at every moment, 
writing, speak ing, brows ing and acting, 
choos ing and making tech no lo gic ally pre- 
determ ined decisions. Media produce 
unknown exper i ences, new life styles, and 
even tu ally new needs, albeit strictly in the 
terms of the format. Th e medium becomes 
an exper i ence in itself. It is no longer a 
means to an end. As Marshall McLuhan
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
concluded in 1964: the medium is the 
message. Giorgio Agamben reﬂ ects on this 
speciﬁ c state of mind as sheer commu nic-
ab il ity in  Means without End:
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
RATIONALIST INHUMANISM 
in-common’ in which Heidegger’s notion 
‘ MitDasein’ is updated. But whatever 
thinker we take, what is needed to 
enlighten our present schiz oid state of 
being is a philo sophy of rela tions and an 
aﬃ  rm at ive, yet crit ical approach of inter-
con nec ted ness. Th e crucial notion in this 
aﬃ  rm at ive approach is ‘ interesse ’ or 
‘interest’. 
 See also Interest/Interesse; Intermediality; 
Critical Posthumanism. 
 Henk Oosterling 
 RATIONALIST INHUMANISM  
 If the concept of  the human has a funda-
mental feature that remains more or less 
constant from antiquity to the present day, 
it is the idea that human ity is some thing 
more than one species of animal amongst 
others. Western culture was founded upon 
myths that sever us from the animal order, 
rein forced by their form al iz a tion in philo-
soph ical and theo lo gical accounts of the 
natural order, and consol id ated by their 
elab or a tion in clas sical human ism. Th is 
supple ment is artic u lated in various ways 
within the Western tradi tion, but it is the 
peren nial picture of ‘Man’ as the  rational 
animal that unites them in distin guish ing 
us from other animals. Th e tradi tional role 
of the human it ies has been to preserve 
and reﬁ ne the cultural self- under stand ing 
that has formed around this picture, 
supply ing both descript ive and norm at ive 
resources for indi vidual and collect ive self- 
determ in a tion. 
 However, as Foucault has shown, even 
though clas sical human ism wrested the 
study of ‘human nature’ from its reli gious 
found a tions, its under stand ing of this 
concept ‘excluded any possib il ity of a 
Classical science of man’ ( Foucault 2002 : 
336). It is the recon ﬁ g ur a tion of the human 
as the object of new ‘human sciences’ that 
consti tutes the histor ical break between 
the clas sical and modern systems of know-
ledge. Th ough the clas sical ration al ism of 
Descartes under stood the world in terms 
of a knowing subject that had no place 
within it, it instig ated an anthro po lo gical 
turn that, follow ing Kant’s critique of 
reason, implanted this subject in the 
modern concept of the human: ‘a strange 
empirico- tran scend ental doublet . . . a 
being such that know ledge will be attained 
in him of what renders all know ledge 
possible’ (ibid.: 347). Th e most inﬂ u en tial 
aspect of Foucault’s analysis is its conclu-
sion, which suggests that this doublet is 
coming undone in the same manner as the 
clas sical concept of human nature, and 
fore sees that ‘man [will] be erased, like a 
face drawn in the sand at the edge of the 
sea’ (419–22). 
 Th is proph ecy has been borne out by 
four inter act ing trends: (i) the natural 
sciences have progress ively under mined 
the supposed  unique ness of our anim al ity, 
by isol at ing empir ical study of  homo sapiens 
from our cultural under stand ing of the 
human; (ii) the human it ies have aggress-
ively critiqued the purpor ted  univer sal ity 
of our ration al ity, by expos ing the illicit 
priv ileging of mascu line, bour geois and 
European forms of life impli cit in the asso-
ci ation of reason with Western civil iz a tion; 
(iii) tech no lo gical advance ment has begun 
to compound these theor et ical trends, by 
modi fy ing and even threat en ing to recre ate 
our  cognit ive capa cit ies in arti ﬁ  cial forms; 
and (iv) envir on mental crisis has begun to 
cata lyse the cultural consequences of these 
other trends, by confront ing our soci et ies 
with the  imper man ence of the natural order 
under ly ing the resid ual vestiges of the clas-
sical world view. Th ese trends have resul ted 
in the emer gence of several strands of 
posthu man ism, which aim to supplant the
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
concep tual found a tions of clas sical human-
ism and its anthro po lo gical vari ants. 
 Transhumanism is the oldest and most 
well developed of these, and is concerned 
prin cip ally with the capa city of emer ging 
tech no lo gies to over come the limit a tions 
of the ‘human condi tion’ as tradi tion ally 
conceived (trend (iii)) and the norm at ive 
implic a tions thereof ( More 2013 ). Critical 
posthu man ism is an attempt to complete 
the auto- decon struc tion of the human it ies 
(trend (ii)) by bring ing the resources of 
crit ical theory and philo soph ical anti hu-
man ism to bear on the ‘posthu man condi-
tion’ as a whole (incor por at ing trends (i), 
(iii) and (iv)) ( Braidotti 2013 : 13–54). It 
accuses transhuman ism of uncrit ic ally 
retain ing central elements of clas sical 
human ism, includ ing a cache of meta-
phys ical distinc tions such as mind/body 
and culture/nature, and a norm at ive focus 
on self- determ in a tion (ibid.: 89–104). By 
contrast, spec u lat ive posthu man ism takes 
the resid ual human ism of transhuman ism 
to consist in under es tim at ing the possible 
diﬀ er ences between humans and posthu-
mans indic ated by natural science and 
tech no lo gical advance ment (trends (i) and 
(iii)) ( Roden 2015 : 13–23). Importantly, it 
rejects the conten tion that posthu man 
intel li gences are bound by the constraints 
of human ration al ity (ibid.: 58–82). 
 Rationalist inhu man ism is an altern a-
t ive to these posi tions that attempts to 
extract the norm at ive core of human ism 
from its imbric a tion with the biolo gical 
and histor ical contin gen cies of the human 
species (confront ing trends (i) and (ii)), so 
as to expli citly artic u late and defend 
aspects of the resid ual human ism that crit-
ical and spec u lat ive posthu man ism locate 
in transhuman ism (Wolfendale, forth com-
ing). It does this by explor ing the connec-
tion between the explan at ory programmes 
of Kantian critique and arti ﬁ  cial general 
intel li gence ( AGI ) ( Adams et  al. 2012 ), 
on the one hand (embra cing trend (iii)), 
and reject ing the theo lo gical equi lib rium 
presup posed by every norm at ive appeal to 
nature ( Brassier 2014b : 485), on the other 
(embra cing trend (iv)). 
 Its  ration al ism  lies in its aﬃ  rm a tion of 
those features of human ism that are 
consequences of the idea that humans are 
deﬁ ned by their the capa city for rational 
agency: it under stands the func tional 
distinc tion between animal  sentience and 
human  sapi ence in terms of the diﬀ er ence 
between reli able diﬀ er en tial response (e.g. 
utter ing ‘x is red’ in the pres ence of red 
things) and concep tual compet ence (e.g. 
under stand ing that ‘x is red’ implies ‘x is not 
green’) ( Brandom 2009 : 200–6), or ‘the 
capa city to engage in discurs ive prac tices’ 
more gener ally ( Negarestani 2014a : 429–
38); and it under stands the norm at ive rift  
between nature and culture in terms of 
 autonomy , or the capa city for indi vidual 
and collect ive self- determ in a tion ( Brassier 
2014b ). 
 Its  inhu man ism lies in its rejec tion of 
those features of human ism that are 
consequences of index ing these capa cit ies 
to the biology, psycho logy, and cultural 
history of  homo sapiens : it sees  reason  as an 
abstract protocol that has been func tion-
ally imple men ted by the techno- linguistic 
infra struc ture 
of 
human 
culture 
( Negarestani 2014a : 452–60; Wolfendale, 
forth com ing); and it sees  freedom  as an 
‘insur rec tion ary force’ that has boot-
strapped itself out of evol u tion ary pre- 
adapt a tions and reformat ted the human 
species as a suit able processing plat form 
( Singleton 
2014 : 
504–7; 
Wolfendale, 
forth com ing). It is this attempt to locate 
an alien vector  within human ism which 
pushes it beyond itself that calls for the 
preﬁ x  in - rather than  anti- ,  post -, or even 
 trans- . It is worth examin ing how 
Negarestani invokes Foucault in order to 
describe this dynamic:
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
RATIONALIST INHUMANISM 
 A univer sal wave that erases the self- 
portrait of man drawn in sand, inhu man-
ism is a vector of revi sion. It relent lessly 
revises what it means to be human by 
remov ing its supposedly self- evident 
char ac ter ist ics while preserving certain 
invari ances. 
 Negarestani 2014a : 427 
 Insofar as the concept of the human artic-
u lates our cultural self- under stand ing it is 
not merely subject to passive change – as 
we have seen in the trans itions between 
pre- clas sical, clas sical and modern eras – 
but open to active revi sion in accord ance 
with the norm of collect ive self- determ in-
a tion. Inhumanism turns human ism’s 
commit ment to self- determ in a tion upon 
itself by elab or at ing the consequences of 
this radical revis ab il ity. 
 Th e theor et ical consequence is the 
dissec tion of the empirico- tran scend ental 
doublet and a renewed  tran scend ent al ism : 
‘reject ing not only psycho lo gism and 
histor icism, but all concrete forms of the 
anthro po lo gical preju dice, we attempt to 
ques tion afresh the limits of thought, and to 
renew contact in this way with the project 
for a general critique of reason’ ( Foucault 
2002 : 372). Th e ‘invari ances’ that cannot be 
revised in the process of self- determ in a tion 
are precisely the condi tions of possib il ity of 
revi sion and self- determ in a tion them-
selves. Th is dissec tion of ‘Man’ extracts the 
univer sal subject of clas sical ration al ism 
from its empir ical clad ding, ﬂ aying the 
mascu line, 
bour geois 
and 
European 
speciﬁ cit ies hidden behind its supposed 
other world li ness from its abstract oper a-
tional form, and leaving nothing but a set of 
func tions that can be real ized in diverse 
mater ial substrates and diver gent forms of 
life: humans, animals, aliens and machines 
alike can adopt the role of sapient subjects 
and autonom ous agents, so long as they 
possess the corres pond ing capa cit ies. Th e 
connec tion between Kantian critique and 
 AGI  lies in their concern with provid ing 
the most  minimal  descrip tion of these 
capa cit ies: a func tional diagram of what 
some thing would have to do to be  gener ally 
capable of thought and action ( Deutsch 
2012 ). 
 Th e prac tical consequence is a form of 
 promethean ism commen sur ate with trans-
human ism: ‘the project of re- engin eer ing 
ourselves and our world on a more 
rational basis’ ( Brassier 2014b : 487). If 
inhu man ism 
treats 
‘supposedly 
self- 
evident char ac ter ist ics’ of human ity – such 
as voca tional social ity, dimorphic sexu al-
ity, or terrestrial domest icity – as concep-
tual determ in a tions to be discarded in 
search ing for minimal condi tions for 
abstract autonomy, then promethean ism 
treats these same char ac ter ist ics as empir-
ical obstacles to be surmoun ted in achiev-
ing maximal condi tions for concrete 
freedom. Th ere are distinct promethean 
projects concerned with each obstacle just 
mentioned: accel er a tion ism strives to turn 
the eman cip at ory tend en cies of modern ity 
against the oppress ive social ity of capit al-
ism ( Srnicek and Williams 2014 ), xeno-
fem in ism aims to harness the arti ﬁ  ci al ity 
of iden tity by reject ing the given ness of 
mater ial condi tions (sex) and social forms 
(gender) alike ( Laboria Cuboniks 2015 ), 
and cosmism enjoins us ‘to consider the 
earth a trap’, treat ing gravity as one more 
constraint to be over come by the ‘gener al-
ised escapo logy’ of design ( Singleton 
2014 ). Th e inhu man ism of these projects 
lies in their embrace of  alien a tion as a 
posit ive force, trans form ing our progress-
ive exile from a series of edenic harmon ies 
– be they economic, soci olo gical or envir-
on mental – into an esoteric gene a logy of 
freedom. 
 Ultimately, what diﬀ er en ti ates crit ical 
and spec u lat ive posthu man ism from 
ration al ist inhu man ism is that they over-
come ‘Man’ by renew ing meta phys ics
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
rather than tran scend ent al ism ( Foucault 
2002 : 
372). 
Critical 
posthu man ism 
collapses the distinc tion between human 
and non- human by posit ing a univer sal 
vital ity –  zoe  – in which both partake 
( Braidotti 2013 : 131), whereas spec u lat ive 
posthu man ism artic u lates the discon nect 
between human and posthu man by posit-
ing a category of func tion ally autonom ous 
assemblages to which both belong ( Roden 
2015 : 124–49). Th e choice between these 
paths can be framed in terms of the peren-
nial picture from which we began: do we 
unbind anim al ity from the  norm at ive 
constraints of ration al ity, or unbind ration-
al ity from the  meta phys ical constraints of 
anim al ity? 
 See also In-Human; Transhumanism/
Posthumanism; Speculative Posthumanism; 
Xenofeminism. 
 Peter Wolfendale 
 REAL COOL ETHICS  
 Th e heady days of the early twenty- ﬁ rst 
century, as marked by the western calen-
dar, can be vari ously named: Anthropocene, 
Capitolocene, neolib er al ism, posthu man-
ism and others. Th ese various names share 
a profound sense of the impossib il ity of 
ethics – indeed, of living an ethical life. 
With a focus on the aspects that are tracked 
by naming this contem por ary episteme 
‘neolib er al ism’, I respond to this pervas ive 
 aporia by anim at ing an ethics of the real 
that must be, in turn, groun ded in the 
complex phenom ena of race. 
 Th e roots of this ethics of the real live in 
the work of Jacques Lacan, espe cially as 
inﬂ ec ted through queer theory. Described 
by Lacan as that which ‘lacks the lack of 
signi ﬁ c a tion’, the real func tions as a kind of 
repel lent magnetic force that resists the 
paucity of signi ﬁ c a tion, includ ing and 
perhaps espe cially that of capital. Radically 
deper son al iz ing, the real of Lacan’s  oeuvre 
thwarts the domin ant epistem o lo gical and 
onto lo gical convic tions of the modern, 
liberal episteme and its most treas ured 
child, human ism. Th e real cannot be 
captured by tradi tional schemas of caus al-
ity, grammar, tempor al ity or the norm at ive 
frame works of subjectiv ity and objectiv ity 
that they subtend. It cannot be a proper 
object of our thought or action, nor the 
proper force of our will or desire. Not a 
tran scend ental, it is also not a possible site 
of author ity, whether prescript ive or 
restrict ive. To shake an ethics out of this 
strange animal is, at the least, a rather queer 
under tak ing. But, even more queerly, it 
may also be a possib il ity that these neo -
lib eral times are opening, ever so obliquely. 
 My route to such an ethics passes 
through the provoc at ive work on the real 
in queer theory, espe cially that of Tim 
Dean. For Dean, as for most queer theor-
ists engaged by psycho ana lysis, sexu al ity 
is 
funda ment ally 
chaotic, 
turbu lent, 
disordered and disor der ing. It radic ally 
resists signi ﬁ c a tion, under cut ting any 
attempts to place a strict iden tity upon it. 
In Lacanian terms, sexu al ity only registers 
in conscious ness through the trace that it 
leaves as the limit of the symbolic order. 
Formulations derived from such concepts 
as sexual diﬀ er ence and sexual object- 
choice disavow this turbu lent, asig ni fy ing 
force. Th ey domest ic ate sexu al ity into 
grids of intel li gible iden tity. By reading 
these aspects of sexu al ity as a ground ing in 
and cathec t ing to the real, Dean emphas-
izes the radic ally deper son al iz ing eﬀ ects of 
sexu al ity. Not only does this under cut 
hetero norm ativ ity qua norm ativ ity, it also 
desub jec ti ﬁ es and even dehu man izes the 
eﬀ ects of sexu al ity qua sexu al ity. Read as 
the real, sexu al ity never was and never can 
become a prop erly human phenomenon.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
REAL COOL ETHICS 
 Sexuality, however, as we should know 
from the extens ive work of black femin ists 
of the 1970s and 1980s, is always already 
racial ized. By reading queer theory’s work 
on sexu al ity as the real in the speciﬁ c geo- 
onto logy of racial iz a tion, I argue we must, 
in the neolib eral episteme, read race as the 
real. Moreover, I argue that doing so may 
be the most prom ising avenue towards a 
creat ing a mean ing ful ethics in these 
dizzy ing times. 
 In  Way Too Cool: Selling Out Race and 
Ethics (2015) I argue that a neolib eral 
social ration al ity displaces the liberal 
subject of desire with a new form of 
subjectiv ity that, again in the Lacanian 
lexicon, can be aptly described as cruis ing 
the circuit of the drive. Th e drive, unlike 
desire and demand, does not aim at any 
object of satis fac tion. Structurally atele olo-
gical, its circuit ous form enlivens repe ti-
tion, rather than arrival, as the form of 
pleas ure. When read as cruis ing the circuit 
of the drive, neolib eral enter pris ing 
prac tices of consumer ism are, in and of 
them selves, quite satis fy ing. Practices of self-
 fash ion ing become prac tices of pleas ure 
and even freedom in neolib er al ism. Th e 
inﬁ n ity of the endless quest for cooler and 
cooler stuﬀ  – and cooler and cooler selves 
– is the ﬁ eld of subjectiv ity. For the neo-
lib eral subject, the endless prolif er a tion of 
interests stim u lated by the market, writ 
quite large, is the site of pleas ure, freedom 
and the self: the more you can intensify 
your interests, the more expans ive, enter-
pris ing and inter est ing you are. And the 
more you can stuﬀ  your mouth!  1 Th is 
extern ally cathec ted, quint es sen tially post- 
modern subject who glories in her super ﬁ -
ci al ity circu lates happily in the neolib eral 
world of endless images and consump tion: 
she is glor i ously no longer  human . 
 Th e neolib eral social ration al ity must 
feed this mouth, endlessly. Rather ingeni-
ously, it ﬁ nds perfect fodder in trans-
formed iter a tions of social diﬀ er ence: 
race, gender, sexu al ity, class, ability and the 
infam ous  etcet era all become cool accessor-
ies, little aesthet i cized nuggets scrubbed 
free of any nasty histor ies of viol ence. Th e 
metric of the market ﬂ at tens the diﬀ er ent 
forms of social diﬀ er ence into wholly 
fungible units. Commanded to ‘celeb rate 
diversity’, neolib eral subjects can no longer 
discern the diﬀ er ences, for example, 
between the increas ing elasti city of gender 
expres sion and intransigent anti- black 
racism. Classical liber al ism’s commit ments 
to toler ance, ener gized by its disavowal of 
xeno pho bia, no longer cathect neolib eral 
subjects. Th e neolib eral episteme rewires 
our most funda mental modes of social 
cathexes from xeno pho bia to cool ness: 
cruis ing the drive of diﬀ er ence, neolib eral 
subjects are swift ly becom ing way too cool. 
 Bringing an ethics of the real to bear, I 
argue one social diﬀ er ence is strik ingly 
unlike all others: race. Neoliberal subjects, 
espe cially in North America and Europe, 
are deeply confused, if not verging on a 
kind of madness, when it comes to matters 
of race. Whether uttered in mono- or 
multiracial settings, speech about race and 
racism sets oﬀ  all kinds of psycho so matic, 
histor ic ally mater ial and deeply suppressed 
dynam ics that will spin most conver sa tions 
into a twisted, carni valesque funhouse. 
Despite the pure excess of mater ial evi -
d ence that we are living in extraordin ar ily 
racist and violent cultures, we seem to have 
no language for it. It resists signi ﬁ c a tion. 
 Consequently, it might be fruit ful to 
under stand the complex phenom ena of 
neolib eral race, with its suppres sion of its 
roots in long violent histor ies of anti- black 
racism, as signalling and cathec t ing us to 
the real. Reading race as the real oﬀ ers a 
profound caution against falling back into 
iden tity categor ies to concep tu al ize and 
talk about race. Unhinged from its loca tion 
as the  objet a of clas sical liber al ism’s core
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
fantas ies of toler ance, the long, violent 
history of xeno pho bia that anim ates the 
concept of race is now precisely that which 
cannot enter signi ﬁ c a tion in the neolib eral 
episteme. We cannot speak of it. We 
increas ingly cannot even recog nize it or its 
absence. And yet it produces a profound 
cultural anxiety: our anxiety about race 
blows our cool. 
 If we under stand this anxiety, again 
with Lacan, as a signalling of the real, then 
eﬀ orts to intensify our social cathexis to 
race precisely as a long history of viol ence 
with ongoing systemic eﬀ ects may be a 
crucial route to becom ing ethical. As 
Alenka Zupančič ( 2000 ) explains, an ethics 
of the real involves an onto lo gical shift , 
iter ated perhaps most sali ently in subjectiv-
ity, that takes us far beyond the ﬁ gure of 
the human. Elaborating an ethics of the 
real as a Lacanian spin ning of Kantian 
ethics, Zupančič eleg antly shows how this 
ethical subject is no longer attached to its 
pathos and thus does not fear losing it. Th is 
ethical subject does not exper i ence the 
impossible commands of the clas sical 
categor ical imper at ive as an ethics of 
asceti cism and sacri ﬁ ce. Undergoing a 
profound trans form a tion in the anthro po-
logy that under girds such concerns, this 
ethical subject is no longer anim ated by 
desire and its vortex of ego- cent rism. As 
Zupančič puts it, ‘We need have no fear 
that entry into the realm of the ethical will 
require us to sacri ﬁ ce all the pleas ures we 
hold so dear, since this will not even be 
exper i enced as a loss or sacri ﬁ ce – “we” will 
not be the same person as before’ (2000: 8). 
 Ironically, 
neolib eral 
subjects 
are 
already not the same person as before. Th e 
neolib eral subject may, there fore, be more 
obliquely prone to the kind of ethics- 
without-pathos 
that 
Kant- avec-Lacan 
artic u lates. Without pathos, neolib eral 
subjects cruise the circuit of the drive, 
where an ethics of the real erupts. Shunning 
motiv a tion and all its person al iz ing, 
intern al iz ing eﬀ ects, an ethics of the real 
may recathect neolib eral subjects back into 
a mean ing ful language of ethics. It may 
harbour suﬃ   cient force to rip through the 
aesthet i ciz ing social dynam ics of neo-
lib eral cultures. 
 Th is is not to smuggle the real back into 
the tradi tional schemas of caus al ity and 
tempor al ity: we cannot wilfully bring the 
real forward as an object of ethical action. 
By reading an ethics of the real as an ethics 
of (endem ic ally sexu al ized) race, I under-
stand a non- causal encounter with the real 
as artic u lat ing the kind of non- agen tial 
response to the long, intense history of 
sexu al ized racism that makes us vigil ant 
about this viol ence without ascrib ing inten-
tion al ity or the moral ity of account ab il ity. It 
connotes a sustained and intens i ﬁ ed atten-
tion to the vast histor ies of sexu al ized 
racism that litter our cultural psyches. It 
forces us to ﬁ nd our ways back through the 
debris of history – still, again. We might 
then recon ceive ourselves precisely as 
posthu man so as to become attuned to the 
inev it able erup tions of the real, espe cially 
signalled as race, in these neolib eral times. 
 See 
also 
Afrofuturism; 
Decolonial 
Critique; 
In-Human; 
Necropolitics; 
Neocolonial; Posthuman Ethics; Socially 
Just Pedagogies 
 Note 
 1. Th e mouth, along with the ear and anus, 
are the somatic indices of the drive for 
Lacan due to their circu lar struc tures. As 
Lacan explains in  Four Fundamental 
Concepts , ‘Even when you stuﬀ  the 
mouth – the mouth that opens in the 
register of the drive – it is not the food 
that satis ﬁ es it, it is, as one says, the 
pleas ure of the mouth’ (1999: 167). 
 Shannon Winnubst
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
RESILIENCE 
 ‘Resilience’ as a quality of ‘complex adapt-
ive systems’ has ﬂ our ished, moving far 
beyond its original applic a tions in the 
envir on mental sciences to become the 
domin ant discourse in contem por ary prac-
tices of crisis manage ment. Developed 
within the ﬁ eld of ecology in the 1970s, 
complex systems theory marked a shift  
from ﬁ rst to second order systems think ing 
and served to concep tu al ize the meta stable 
or resi li ent dynam ics of socio- ecolo gical 
systems that were  always more than human . 
Th e concept of resi li ence has in the recent 
past rapidly inﬁ lt rated vast areas of the 
social sciences, becom ing a regular, if 
under the or ized, term of art in discus sions 
of inter na tional ﬁ nance and economic 
policy, in corpor ate risk analysis, the 
psycho logy of trauma, community and 
devel op ment policy, urban plan ning, public 
health and national secur ity. Malleable and 
capa cious enough to encom pass the human 
and non- human within a single analyt ics 
of power, the concept of resi li ence is 
becom ing a pervas ive idiom of global 
governance. 
 Th e term ‘resi li ence’ origin ated in the 
work of the ecolo gist Crawford ‘Buzz’ 
Holling who in the 1970s did some of the 
most import ant work to modern ize the 
clas sical systems model of ecolo gical 
dynam ics in terms of the new ‘complex ity 
science’: away from mech an istic asser tions 
of equi lib rium typical of post- war cyber-
net ics toward the contem por ary ‘complex-
ity science’ view of ecosys tems. Th e key 
image of science that propelled the form al-
iz a tion of econom ics (in the 1870s) and 
ecology (in the 1950s) was of smooth and 
continu ous returns to equi lib rium aft er 
shock, an image derived from diﬀ er ent 
vintages of clas sical mech an ics and ther mo-
 dy nam ics. Holling’s widely cited paper 
‘Resilience and Stability of Ecological 
Systems’ (1973) repres ents the destabil iz a-
tion of the notion of ‘equi lib rium’ as the 
core of the ecosys tem concept and the 
normal terminus of ecosys tem traject ory, 
and the begin ning of a major shift  among 
ecolo gists away from the notion that there 
exists a ‘balance of nature’ to which life will 
return even tu ally if left  to self- repair. 
Having worked for years in the ﬁ eld as a 
resource manager and conser va tion ecolo-
gist, Holling began his classic 1973 paper 
on resi li ence by noting that: 
 tradi tions of analysis in theor et ical and 
empir ical ecology have been largely 
inher ited from devel op ments in clas sical 
physics and its applied vari ants . . . there 
has been a tend ency to emphas ize the 
quant it at ive rather than the qual it at ive, 
for it is import ant in this tradi tion to 
know not just that a quant ity is larger 
than another quant ity, but precisely how 
much larger . . . But this orient a tion may 
simply reﬂ ect an analytic approach 
developed in one because it was useful 
and then trans ferred to another where it 
may not be. 
 1973: 1 
 Holling goes on to distin guish between an 
exist ing notion that he calls ‘engin eer ing 
resi li ence’ and his altern at ive, a prop erly 
‘ecolo gical’ resi li ence. Engineering resi li-
ence, asso ci ated with the reign ing math e-
m at ical ecology ( Odum 1969 ;  Lewontin 
1969 ; May, Levin and Sugihara 1973), is an 
abstract vari able, simply the time (t) it takes 
a system to return to a stable maximum (or 
equi lib rium posi tion) aft er a disturb ance. 
Th e return is simply assumed, and the equi-
lib rium state is taken as equi val ent to long- 
term persist ence. What Holling seeks to 
deﬁ ne instead is a complex notion of resi li-
ence which can account for the ability of an 
ecosys tem to remain cohes ive even while 
under go ing extreme perturb a tions. If 
stabil ity refers to the famil iar notion of a 
return to equi lib rium, ‘ecolo gical’ resi li ence
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
that determ ine ‘the persist ence of rela tion-
ships within a system’, thus resi li ence is ‘a 
measure of the ability of these systems to 
absorb changes of state vari ables, driving 
vari ables, and para met ers, and still persist’ 
( Holling 1973 : 17). 
 Holling points to the dangers of the 
manage ment 
theory 
of 
‘maximum 
sustained yield’ ( MSY ), long domin ant in 
indus trial forestry and ﬁ sh er ies, with its 
claims to enumer ate a ﬁ xed quant ity of 
‘surplus’ cod or spruce that can be harves-
ted year in year out, without under min ing 
the ability of the ecosys tem to recu per ate 
its own productiv ity. Holling’s argu ment 
here (mirror ing Hyman Minsky’s post-
Keynesian account of ﬁ nan cial crises) is 
that the long- term expect a tion of stabil ity 
may be inher ently destabil iz ing. Th e ideal 
of a constant yield of productiv ity may 
fragil ize a natural resource to such an 
extent that it under mines complex factors 
support ing the resi li ence of the system as 
a whole. ‘Th e very approach . . . that assures 
a stable maximum sustained yield of a 
renew able resource might so change these 
determ in istic condi tions that the resi li ence 
is lost or reduced so that a chance and rare 
event that previ ously could be absorbed 
can trigger a sudden dramatic change and 
loss of struc tural integ rity of the system’ 
( Holling 1973 : 21). Holling’s perspect ive 
on resource manage ment reﬂ ects the 
emer ging crit ical voices which, in the early 
seven ties, insisted that intens ive methods 
in agri cul ture and resource manage ment 
would at some point meet inher ent limits 
to sustain ab il ity, result ing in mass extinc-
tions and intol er able levels of pollu tion. 
For Holling, the equi lib rium approach was 
danger ously self- sabot aging: glossing over 
the unknow ably complex inter de pend en-
cies of speciﬁ c land scapes pressed into 
the condi tions of maxim ized yield, it could 
all too easily accel er ate the process of 
fragil iz a tion, poten tially leading to the 
irre vers ible loss of biod iversity. By contrast, 
Holling’s perspect ive seeks to open up a 
manage ment approach capable of sustain-
ing productiv ity even under condi tions of 
extreme instabil ity. Its ability to adapt to 
and deﬂ ect from partic u lar limits derives 
from the fact that it has aban doned long- 
term expect a tions and progress ive growth 
hori zons: 
  A manage ment approach based on resi li-
ence . . . would emphas ize the need to 
keep options open . . . and the need to 
emphas ize hetero gen eity. Flowing from 
this would be not the presump tion of 
suﬃ   cient know ledge, but the recog ni tion 
of our ignor ance: not the assump tion that 
future events are expec ted, but that they 
will be unex pec ted. Th e resi li ence frame-
work can accom mod ate this shift  in 
perspect ive, for it does not require a 
precise capa city to predict the future, 
but only a qual it at ive capa city to devise 
systems that can absorb and accom mo-
d ate future events in whatever unex pec ted 
form they may take. 
 Holling 1973 : 21 
 Th e above passage, taken from the conclu-
sion of Holling’s 1973 article, is signi ﬁ c ant 
because it so clearly anti cip ates the guiding 
ideas of contem por ary complex systems 
theory and its prac tical applic a tions in 
crisis response. Under the sign of resi li ence, 
this is an approach to risk manage ment 
which fore grounds the limits to predict ive 
know ledge and insists on the preval ence of 
the unex pec ted, seeking to ‘absorb and 
accom mod ate future events in whatever 
unex pec ted form they may take’ (ibid.). 
 Holling’s later contri bu tions to the 
prac tices of adapt ive ecosys tem manage-
ment (1986) earned him wide profes sional 
recognition. Following consensus build ing 
work with leading ortho dox econom ists 
(Arrow et  al. 1995), Holling and fellow 
ecolo gists formed the Resilience Alliance,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
RESILIENCE 
well beyond ecology. More recently, these 
initi at ives have been brought together 
within the Stockholm Resilience Centre, a 
high- proﬁ le think- tank which promotes 
the uses of resi li ence theory in inter na-
tional envir on ment and devel op ment 
projects. Emblematic in the name change 
of the house journal from  Conservation 
Ecology to  Ecology and Society , the Alliance 
and Stockholm Resilience Centre was no 
longer concerned with resi li ence as a prop-
erty of ecosys tems but of the co- evol u tion 
of soci et ies and ecosys tems as a single 
system. Th is new research into ‘social- 
ecolo gical resi li ence’ aspires to set the 
ground rules for a general systems theory 
capable of integ rat ing society, the economy 
and the biosphere in a posthu man world. 
Th is total ity is dubbed the ‘Panarchy’: 
  the struc ture in which systems, includ ing 
those of nature (e.g., forests) and of humans 
(e.g., capit al ism), as well as combined 
human- natural systems (e.g., insti tu tions 
that govern natural resource use such as the 
Forest Service), are inter linked in continual 
adapt ive cycles of growth, accu mu la tion, 
restruc tur ing, and renewal.  
 Gunderson and Holling 2002 
 Th ere is a signi ﬁ c ant diﬀ er ence in scope 
and tone between this later deﬁ n i tion of 
socio- ecolo gical resi li ence and Holling’s 
earlier work. Holling is no longer arguing 
that 
some 
socio- ecolo gical 
systems 
undergo extreme ﬂ uc tu ations; nor even 
that all systems enter into stress condi tions 
under the demands of maximum sustained 
yield; but rather that  all ecosys tem  and 
social- ecolo gical system dynam ics can be 
approached heur ist ic ally as non- linear 
iter a tions of an ‘adapt ive cycle’, moving 
through the phases of rapid succes sional 
growth ( r ) followed by stable equi lib rium 
(K), by collapse (Ω), and then a spon tan-
eous reor gan iz a tion that leads to a new 
growth phase ( α ) ( Holling 1992 ). Having 
emerged as a crit ical perspect ive on 
modern ist theor ies of economic growth in 
the post-Second World War era, resi li ence 
theory now presents itself as an altern at ive 
theory of growth in non- equi lib rium 
condi tions – one that is capable of explain-
ing the general dynam ics of social and 
ecolo gical evol u tion in a more than human 
world. 
 Today, we might argue that the science 
of complex adapt ive systems has become 
a theor et ical refer ence point for the full 
spec trum of contem por ary risk inter ven-
tions. Its inﬂ u ence is now felt in arenas as 
diverse as psycho logy, educa tion, urban 
plan ning, global devel op ment policy, milit-
ary strategy, disaster and risk manage ment, 
social policy, central banking, ﬁ nan cial 
econom ics, 
ecosys tems 
science 
and 
resource manage ment. Whereas energy 
physics played a found a tional role in clas-
sical modern ist theor ies of economic and 
ecolo gical organ iz a tion, and the homeo-
static systems of ﬁ rst order cyber net ics 
domin ated the economic and milit ary 
sciences of the Cold War, complex ity 
science now serves as a source of natur al-
iz ing meta phors for contem por ary prac-
tices of secur ity, and func tions to neut ral ize 
crit ical inquiry into the disastrous con-
sequences of neolib eral approaches to 
ﬁ nan cial regu la tion, urban plan ning and 
crisis response, envir on mental policy and 
devel op ment. Since the nineties, global 
ﬁ nan cial 
insti tu tions 
such 
as 
the 
International Monetary Fund ( IMF 1996, 
2006) the World Bank ( 2006 ,  2008 ), and 
the Bank for International Settlements 
( BIS  2002 ,  2008 ), have increas ingly incor-
por ated strategies of ‘resi li ence’ into their 
logist ics of crisis manage ment, ﬁ nan cial 
(de)regu la tion and devel op ment econom-
ics. With the post–9/11 revolu tion in 
‘home land secur ity’, resi li ence has become
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
a byword among agen cies charged with co- 
ordin at ing secur ity responses to climate 
change, crit ical infra struc ture protec tion, 
natural disasters, pandem ics and terror ism 
(cf.  Coaﬀ ee, Wood and Rogers 2009 ;  Evans 
and Reid 2014 ), reori ent ing these once 
distinct policy arenas toward a horizon of 
crit ical future events which (we are told) 
we cannot predict or prevent, but merely 
adapt to by ‘build ing resi li ence’. In the 
process, we would argue, resi li ence theory 
has largely ceased to operate as critique 
and now asserts itself as a fully ﬂ edged 
meth od o logy of power. 
 See also Capitalocene and Chthulucene; 
Earth; Ecoontology; Ecosophy; Exclusion 
Zone; General Ecology; Metastability; 
Negentropy; Planetary; Survival; Violence; 
War. 
 Jeremy Walker and 
Melinda Cooper 
 REWILDING  
 Th e concept of rewild ing has rapidly 
expan ded to take on ever wider and more 
meta phor ical mean ings in the short period 
since it estab lished itself within the vocab-
u lary 
of 
inter- discip lin ary, 
prac tice- 
oriented envir on mental think ing in the late 
1990s. Beginning as a tech nical descrip tion 
for the release of captive animals into the 
wild, it quickly took on the more general 
meaning of the re- intro duc tion of plant 
and animal species to natural areas that 
they previ ously inhab ited. Th e deﬁ n i-
tion also now extends to exper i mental 
programmes to restart natural processes in 
the land scapes that have been denuded of 
biod iversity as a result of anthro po genic 
degrad a tion by using proxy species to 
replace extinct animals. Genetic engin eer-
ing even holds out the prospect in the not 
so distant future of the ‘de- extinc tion’ of 
species, 
with 
mammoth- like 
hybrids 
released into the wild to rein vig or ate 
ecosys tems. Since it pertains to the eﬀ ects 
of activ it ies that took place as far back as 
the Palaeolithic period, rewild ing also has 
implic a tions for society in general and our 
rela tions to the natural world by opening 
up vistas for the renewal of life styles made 
tame by consumer capit al ism. 
 Th e gath er ing pace of what has been 
called the Sixth Extinction, the ﬁ rst mass 
extinc tion event in geolo gical history to be 
triggered by the activ it ies of a single 
species, is the under ly ing motiv a tion for 
attempts to delib er ately slow or reverse the 
collapse of biod iversity through rewild ing. 
As the chem istry of the oceans alters and 
the stabil ity of climate systems breaks 
down, those species that are not able to 
migrate in search of refuge or adapt to new 
condi tions are disap pear ing at a rate of 
thou sands of times back ground extinc tion, 
or the rate that would be expec ted to occur 
natur ally. Rewilding holds out the prospect 
of bold action to engin eer the recov ery of 
endangered species by rebal an cing the 
equa tion of humans and nature, even if in 
the short term reset ting the natural ecosys-
tems requires unortho dox human inter-
ven tions that push at the distinc tions made 
between the activ it ies of the human, or 
culture, and those of nature or non- human. 
 In its most radical form, Pleistocene 
rewild ing seeks to rein tro duce the mega-
fauna, from mammoths and giant ground 
sloths to sabre- toothed cats, which roamed 
the plains of Europe and the Americas 
until they were wiped out by humans 
10,000 years ago. In the many cases where 
the mega fauna in ques tion are now extinct, 
accord ing to the prin ciples of rewild ing, 
the closest surviv ing species should be 
intro duced, even if they were never native 
to the area in ques tion. Th e most dramatic 
rewild ing project to date involves creat ing
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
REWILDING 
Siberia, where the rein tro duc tion of bison, 
moose and wild horses aims to trans form 
the water logged and mossy tundra into a 
diverse, grassy steppe, similar to the habitat 
once enjoyed by mammoths. Criticism of 
such projects has focused on the risk that 
intro du cing mega fauna to habit ats that 
have evolved without them for thou sands 
of years could have a negat ive envir on-
mental eﬀ ect, while barbed warn ings about 
the dangers of ‘Frankenstein ecosys tems’ 
high lights the survival within rewild ing 
of the tech no cratic urge to inter fere with 
nature. 
 Debates 
around 
rewild ing 
have 
revolved on the one hand over the choice 
of ‘baseline’, in other words whether we 
should aim to recre ate an approx im a tion 
of a Late Pleistocene land scape or whether 
it is enough to set the clock back to the 
period before the arrival of Europeans. 
Critics of rewild ing, echoing the objec tion 
frequently raised to the Anthropocene 
thesis that it unfairly displaces respons ib il-
ity for ecolo gical crisis from capit al ism and 
colo ni al ism to human ity as a whole, have 
pointed out that by shift  ing the blame for 
the destruc tion of wilder ness onto pre -
his toric hunter- gather ers the enorm ous 
envir on mental impact of Western imper i-
al ism and capit al ist econom ics is minim-
ized. Rather than over com ing the dual istic 
divide between human ity and nature, the 
project of Pleistocene rewild ing can also 
be seen as the most extreme mani fest a tion 
of the modern Western mindset that 
simul tan eously ideal izes the purity of lost 
wilder ness and cham pi ons scientiﬁ c inter-
ven tion to restore it. 
 In addi tion to reviv i fy ing entire ecosys-
tems by rein tro du cing the wild card of 
large pred at ors and missing keystone 
species, rewild ing seeks to provide oppor-
tun it ies for modern society to recon nect 
with the wild. Environmentalist and writer 
George Monbiot has written in  Feral: 
Searching for Enchantment on the Frontiers 
of Rewilding  (2013) about his attempts to 
re- awaken in himself the capa cit ies to 
navig ate a wilder world that lie buried in 
our psycho lo gical make- up, but which are 
dulled by the habits of living in a modern 
economy that has no need for primeval 
mental and phys ical skills. Th e project of 
recon nect ing with suppressed, inner wild-
ness oscil lates between the revival of 
romantic indi vidu al ism and ques tion ing 
the alien a tion from the natural world asso-
ci ated with consumer capit al ism. In this 
regard, anthro po lo gist Eduardo Kohn in 
 How Forest’s Th ink  (2013) has chal lenged 
assump tions about the inev it ab il ity of the 
separ a tion of humans from the natural 
world, demon strat ing that forest creatures 
are able to think, repres ent the world, and 
make meaning without language. Actions 
to rewild culture and society could also be 
funda mental to chan ging the outlook of 
techno- capit al ist society and combat ing 
the malaise of ‘ecolo gical boredom’, a 
passive state of mind that may also account 
for the wide spread indiﬀ er ence to the 
approach ing spectre of ecolo gical disaster. 
 In place of the static, territ orial 
paradigm of the national park, wild ness is 
conceived by rewilders as a ﬂ uid category 
that can occur in all types of land- and 
seascapes, and on a micro as well as a 
macro scale, while optim istic signs of 
natural resi li ence are iden ti ﬁ ed in cases of 
the re- colon iz a tion by animals of urban as 
well as rural areas as humans retreat. 
Rewilding is also self- consciously geared 
not towards achiev ing the human- deﬁ ned 
end state of ‘wilder ness’, but rather aims to 
set in motion natural dynam ics that will 
ulti mately result in autonom ous habit ats 
and self- managing land scapes. Rewilding 
could be seen as an Anthropocene notion 
par excel lence, since it recog nizes the 
unique respons ib il ity of the human race
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
destruc tion of biod iversity, calls for human 
inter ven tion to remedy the situ ation, and 
at the same time holds out the prospect 
that in the future humans will delib er ately 
relin quish control and let re- wilded nature 
be ‘natural’ again. 
 See also Animal; Animism; Anthropocene; 
Earth; Ecosophy; Extinction; Resilience. 
 Maja and Reuben Fowkes 
 ROBOPHILOSOPHY  
 Th e term ‘robo philo sophy’ stands for a 
funda mental system atic recon ﬁ g ur a tion of 
philo sophy in the face of arti ﬁ  cial social 
agency. Unlike other system atic research 
initi at ives in philo sophy, robo philo sophy 
is time- sens it ive, directly motiv ated by 
tech no lo gical devel op ments, and proact-
ive. Robophilosophy is a response to (1) 
projec tions of the explos ive devel op ment 
of the robot ics market in the third decade 
of the twenty- ﬁ rst century, and (2) to 
empir ical evid ence that the large- scale use 
of arti ﬁ  cial ‘social’ agents in public and 
private spaces of human social inter ac tions 
quite likely will lead to profound disrup-
tions of economic, social and cultural 
prac tices in indus tri al ized soci et ies West 
and East. 
 Th e term ‘robo philo sophy’ has wider 
currency in academic contexts since 
the 
inaug ur a tion 
of 
the 
bi- annual 
Robophilosophy Conference Series in 
2014.  1 Th e term was coined by the author 
in 2013, in reson ance with Gianmarco 
Veruggio’s call for ‘robo- ethics’, in order to 
signal that the chal lenges of ‘social robot-
ics’ go beyond ethical concerns and address 
all discip lines of philo soph ical research. 
Moreover, robo philo sophy is a complex 
recon ﬁ g ur a tion that engages three research 
perspect ives at once – it is ‘philo sophy  of , 
 for , and  by  social robot ics’ ( Seibt Hakli 
and Nørskov 2016 ). Th e follow ing para-
graphs will describe each of these three 
perspect ives in greater detail; however, 
as will also become clear in the course of 
the expos i tion, these perspect ives form 
system at ic ally connec ted traject or ies and 
contri bu tions to robo philo sophy – here 
asso ci ated for illus tra tion with one per-
spect ive – which should more prop erly be 
char ac ter ized in terms of loca tions within 
a three- dimen sional research space. 
 Th e ﬁ rst dimen sion, philo sophy  of social 
robot ics, takes the reﬂ ect ive stance of tradi-
tional philo soph ical research and invest ig-
ates the concep tual implic a tions of the 
phenom ena of human inter ac tions with 
robots that act in accord ance with social 
norms. Aft er a decade of empir ical research 
in ‘human–robot inter ac tion studies’ ( HRI ) 
there is suﬃ   cient evid ence to show that 
humans accept robots as social inter ac tion 
part ners and even attrib ute to them moral 
stand ing. Given that these human reac tions 
are sincere, they are counterevid ence to (a) 
the Cartesian paradigm of subjectiv ity 
accord ing to which self- conscious ness, 
freedom, inten tion al ity, norm at ive agency 
and epistemic and moral autonomy are a 
package deal, and (b) to tradi tional and still 
domin ant philo soph ical concep tions of 
social ity that restrict the capa city for social-
ity to Cartesian subjects, or else postu late, 
with Hegel, constitutive mutual depend en-
cies between the capa city of social ity and 
the capa cit ies asso ci ated with the tradi-
tional model of subjectiv ity. Since the latter 
ﬁ gures cent rally in the legit im iz a tion of 
moral and polit ical author ity in Western 
demo cra cies, there may be far- reach ing 
reper cus sions of a pervas ive prac tical 
recon ﬁ g ur a tion of the relev ant capa cit ies 
(e.g. social ity without self- conscious ness, 
norm at ive agency of great economic power 
without freedom). In short, robo philo sophy
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ROBOPHILOSOPHY 
as ‘philo sophy  of social robot ics’ tries to 
come to terms with the fact that the empir-
ical evid ence collec ted in  HRI research 
goes against a built- in feature of Western 
thought that only humans are the kind of 
entity that can stand in social rela tions, and/
or that stand ing in social rela tions confers 
upon humans excep tional capa cit ies, as well 
as the rights and statuses adher ing to these. 
Turkle’s feli cit ous obser va tion that ‘we live 
the robotic moment not because we have 
compan ion ate robots in our lives but 
because the way we contem plate them on 
the horizon says much about who we are 
and who we are willing to become’ (2011: 
26) addresses the ‘robotic moment’ from an 
anthro po lo gical perspect ive as a turning 
point in contem por ary culture, while robo-
philo sophy as philo sophy of social robot ics 
puts the ‘robotic moment’ into the wider 
perspect ives of human socio- cultural and 
polit ical history and explores its meta ph ilo-
soph ical implic a tions as a game- changer 
for philo soph ical research. Outstanding 
examples of philo soph ical inter ac tions 
with social robot ics that expli citly engage 
the 
meta ph ilo soph ical 
dimen sion 
are 
 Coeckelbergh 2012  and  Gunkel 2012 , who 
relate the new ethical tasks arising with 
social robot ics to the decon struc tions of 
modern subjectiv ity that twen ti ety- century 
philo sophy developed on purely theor et ical 
grounds. 
 Another import ant task for ‘philo sophy 
 of social robot ics’, the reﬂ ect ive dimen sion 
of robo philo sophy, is to situate the 
phenom ena of human–robot inter ac tions 
within the larger context of philo sophy of 
tech no logy. As Nørskov ( 2015 ) observes, 
Don Ihde’s phenomen o lo gical clas si ﬁ c a-
tion of ‘human–tech no logy rela tion ships’ 
must be funda ment ally reworked to 
capture the pecu liar complex it ies of the 
phenomen o logy of human–robot inter ac-
tions. Interestingly, since robots are 
produced in high- tech no logy soci et ies 
West and East, philo soph ical reﬂ ec tions on 
social robot ics quite natur ally lead from 
auto- cultural hermen eut ics into cross- 
cultural compar at ive and inter cul tural 
philo sophy of tech no logy (cf.  Nagenborg 
2007 ;  Funk and Irrgang 2014 ;  Nørskov 
2011 ;  Nakada and Capurro 2013 ). 
 Th e second dimen sion of robo philo-
sophy, ‘philo sophy  for social robot ics’, 
employs stand ard methods of philo soph ical 
research such as concep tual analysis, method 
analysis, capa city analysis, phenomen o lo-
gical analysis, formal theory construc tion 
and value- theor etic discus sion for the sake 
of address ing theor et ical prob lems in the 
research meth od o logy of social robot ics, 
and in order to guide the devel op ment of 
social robot ics applic a tions. 
 To begin with the fore most task of a 
philo sophy  for  social robot ics, roboti cists 
and research ers in  HRI (Human–Robot 
Interaction Studies) currently operate in an 
inter dis cip lin ary domain (in the inter sec-
tion of robot ics, psycho logy, anthro po logy 
and soci ology) that suﬀ ers from the lack of 
a joint descript ive frame work relat ive to 
which robotic capa cit ies, human reac tions 
and human–robot inter ac tions can be 
char ac ter ized in clear and precise termin o-
logy. Despite some early eﬀ orts to clarify 
and clas sify vari et ies of ‘social’ robots 
( Breazeal 2003 ;  Fong Nourbakhsh and 
Dautenhahn 2003 ), most research ers in 
social robot ics use the epithet ‘social’ 
without appar ently being aware of the 
semantic commit ments incurred by our 
current concep tual norms that govern the 
meaning of this term. As philo soph ical 
recon struc tions of these concep tual norms 
make clear, however, we cannot simply 
relax the require ments for social ity in 
general without thereby eﬀ ect ing central 
regions of our infer en tial space ( Hakli 
2014 ). Rather, we need to consider 
social ity as a gradi ent notion and develop 
precise, diﬀ er en ti ated descrip tions of
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
human–robot inter ac tions that can justi ﬁ -
ably be said to realize various degrees and 
types of social ity. Currently robotic capa-
cit ies are described meta phor ic ally, using 
the inten tion al ist vocab u lary of human 
actions and social inter ac tions – robots are 
said to ‘answer’, ‘recog nize’, ‘deliver’, ‘respond’, 
‘collab or ate’, ‘smile’, ‘greet’ etc. At best such 
inten tion al ist idioms are brack eted by the 
‘de- real iz a tion oper ator’  as- if : ‘We inter act 
with [a social robot] as if it were a person, 
and ulti mately as a friend’ ( Breazeal 2002 : 
ix). Here and else where the prepos i tion  as- 
if is presen ted as the ‘as- if’ of ﬁ ction al ity 
and pretend- play, which has motiv ated 
ethical criti cism of social robot ics as enga-
ging humans in inau thentic social rela-
tions. However, ﬁ ction al ist inter pret a tions 
of the social ity in human–robot inter ac-
tions are inco her ent; social rela tions cannot 
be ‘ﬁ ction al ized’ – I cannot treat an item  as 
if it were a person since the perform ance of 
such a social action is constitutive for its 
real iz a tion ( Seibt et al. 2014 ,  2016 ). Rather, 
the de- real iz a tion in ques tion should be 
under stood as the  as- if of simu la tion, 
where simu la tion is a simil ar ity rela tion on 
processes; the latter can be used fairly 
straight for wardly for the deﬁ n i tion of a 
ﬁ ne- grained clas si ﬁ c at ory frame work for 
simu lated social inter ac tions and asso ci-
ated degrees and types of social ity allow ing 
for asym met ric (non- recip rocal) distri-
bu tions of capa cit ies among inter ac tion 
part ners (ibid.). Th is switch from the ‘as- if’ 
of ﬁ ction al ity to the ‘as- if’ of simu la tion – 
which funda ment ally changes the premises 
for an ethical eval u ation of human–robot 
inter ac tion – is the corner stone for a 
compre hens ive descript ive frame work for 
the inter dis cip lin ary ﬁ eld of  HRI . 2   
 Th e second task area of a philo sophy  for 
social robot ics is to analyse in detail 
speciﬁ c human capa cit ies and social roles. 
For example, which kinds of func tion al it-
ies would a robot need to have to able to 
provide ‘care’ or to ‘teach’ or to ‘coach’ – 
in the sense relev ant in, for example, 
health care, language train ing or dietary 
assist ance, 
respect ively 
( Vallor 
2011 ; 
 Wynsberghe 2015 )? If robots are to be 
‘friends’ or ‘compan ions’, which beha vi-
oural routines would they need to exhibit 
to be perceived as such ( Sullins 2008 )? 
Th ese invest ig a tions are direct exten sions 
of famil iar capa cit ies analyses in  AI of 
human cognit ive predic ates; however, 
while the ques tion whether computers 
really can ‘think’ or ‘form new concepts’ is 
mainly of theor et ical interest, concep tual 
and phenomen o lo gical analyses of capa-
city require ments for social actions and 
roles imme di ately lead to ethical issues. 
Th is also holds for the capa city of ethical 
reas on ing itself – invest ig a tions about  how 
to 
imple ment 
ethical 
reas on ing 
in 
machines – for instance, in milit ary robots 
– are tied to the ques tion of  whether to do 
it and thereby relin quish control ( Wallach 
and Allen 2010 ). In tandem with devel op-
ing a ﬁ ne- grained clas si ﬁ c at ory frame work 
for the descrip tion of human–robot inter-
ac tions, philo sophy  for social robot ics thus 
must deﬁ ne a diﬀ er en ti ated array of new 
notions of moral and legal respons ib il ity 
for collect ive agency constel la tions that 
involve robots. 
 Th e third dimen sion of robo philo-
sophy, philo sophy  by social robot ics, 
repres ents a far- reach ing meth od o lo gical 
reori ent a tion of philo soph ical research. As 
mentioned above,  HRI research is an 
inter dis cip lin ary ﬁ eld oper at ing with 
quant it at ive, exper i mental and qual it at ive 
empir ical research. If philo sophy becomes, 
as philo sophy  for social robot ics, an integ-
ral part of  HRI – as it must, due to ethical 
concerns – the stand ard philo soph ical 
meth od o lo gies 
(concep tual 
and 
phenomen o lo gical analysis, rational value 
discourse etc.) lose the relat ive autonomy 
that is tradi tion ally cred ited to them. Th e
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ROBOPHILOSOPHY 
philo soph ers to rework tradi tional concep-
tions of norm at ive agency, social ity, moral 
status, respons ib il ity, etc., they also open 
up new ways of conduct ing ‘exper i mental 
philo sophy’. For example, by imple ment ing 
ethical reas on ing in robots philo soph ers 
can invest ig ate by construc tion and exper i-
ment which, if any, of the meta- ethical 
strategies 
(deont o logy, 
util it ari an ism, 
virtue ethics etc.) leads to decisions that ﬁ t 
with our ethical intu itions, relat ive to 
which types of agen t ive contexts. Similarly, 
by varying design and func tion al it ies of 
humanoid robots philo soph ers can join 
neur os cient ists in the empir ical invest i-
g a tion into which, if any, of the extant 
altern at ive accounts of our capa city of 
‘mind- reading’ (theory of mind, simu-
la tion theory, phenomen o logy, mind- 
shaping) are most adequate and what this 
implies for the philo soph ical inter pret a-
tion of mental discourse. 
 See also  AI (Artiﬁ cial Intelligence); 
Process 
Ontologies; 
Transhumanism/
Posthumanism.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
across envir on mental, mater ial, polit ical 
and aesthetic concerns, subjects and 
milieus (cf.  Stengers 2011b ). From sensors 
used for envir on mental monit or ing to 
collab or a tions with lichens to under stand 
air pollu tion, as well as smart infra struc-
tures that sense and adjust to real- time 
condi tions, the registers and prac tices of 
sensing are shift  ing from an assumed 
human- centred set of perceiv ing and 
decod ing prac tices, to exten ded entit ies, 
tech no lo gies and envir on ments of sense. 
New registers of sense are becom ing 
evident as organ isms express diﬀ er ent and 
dynamic ways in which envir on ments are 
chan ging. And many of these shift s and 
exten ded registers of sense are further 
captured through ubiquit ous comput ing 
that distrib utes sensing capa cit ies across 
envir on ments. Citizen sensing also consti-
tutes a set of sensing prac tices that is meant 
to enable and empower people to sense for 
polit ical eﬀ ect, giving rise to ques tions 
about the polit ics of sense, and how sensing 
entit ies trans form into agents of provoca-
tion and change (Cuﬀ  and Hansen 2008; 
 Goodchild 2007 ). 
 While we focus on citizen sensing in 
order to develop this notion of sensing 
prac tices, many other prac tices could be 
drawn together to elab or ate this concept, 
from trans- mater ial and racial ized exper i-
ences of lead pois on ing ( Chen 2012 ), to 
digital simu la tion envir on ments for battle-
ﬁ eld prepar a tion ( Suchman and Weber 
2016 ), to insect- plant coup lings forming 
partic u lar ecolo gies of sense (cf.  Braidotti 
 SENSING PRACTICES  
 If you were to outline a diagram of how 
an air pollu tion sensor inter acts with an 
envir on ment it would look some thing like 
this: air passing across a chem ical 
membrane or being drawn into an optical 
sensor either forms a chem ical reac tion, in 
the case of the membrane, or is passed 
across an infra- red beam and counted for 
numbers of particles in the case of an 
optical sensor. Th ese sensory read ings and 
reac tions cause voltages in elec trical 
circuits to ﬂ uc tu ate, gener at ing signals that 
in turn can be conver ted into digital output 
to be read as data in the form of parts per 
million of the partic u lar pollut ant being 
sensed. Yet such a sensor might also be 
used as part of speciﬁ c envir on mental 
monit or ing under taken by a concerned 
citizen in order to docu ment poten tially 
harmful levels of pollu tion from industry 
or road ways. Th e unit of sense – the seem-
ingly discrete organ or object through 
which sensing would occur – becomes 
entangled as another entity and set of rela-
tions in the making through the speciﬁ c 
sensing prac tices under way. 
 Th is example of an air pollu tion sensor 
deployed for citizen sensing prac tices is 
just one of many possible examples of the 
ways in which sensing and units of sense 
begin to shift  toward what we are calling 
‘sensing 
prac tices’ 
( Gabrys 
2012b ; 
 Pritchard 2013 ). Sensing prac tices refer to 
the ways in which sensing and prac tice 
emerge, take hold and form attach ments 
 S
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SENSING PRACTICES 
2006a ). With these devel op ments in mind, 
how might it be possible to rethink and 
rework the prac tices, entit ies and envir on-
ments of sense within this broader context 
where the assumed subjects and traject or-
ies of sense are shift  ing? How might these 
expan ded approaches to sensing prac tices 
recast engage ments with exper i ence, while 
recon ﬁ g ur ing explor a tions of prac tice- 
based research ( Citizen Sense 2014–15 )? 
 Rather than take ‘the senses’ as a ﬁ xed 
start ing point, we suggest that sensing- as-
practice allows for an atten tion to these 
diﬀ er ent artic u la tions of sense, partic u larly 
in rela tion to tech no lo gies of envir on-
mental monit or ing, data gathered for evi-
d en tiary claims, the form a tion of citizens, 
and 
more- than-human 
entan gle ments. 
Sensing- as-practice also allows for an 
atten tion to exper i ence that does not 
concen trate exclus ively on a human subject, 
but instead accounts for a vast range of 
sensing subjects, from stones to insects (cf. 
 Whitehead 1929 ). William James, a philo-
sopher who inﬂ u enced Whitehead, suggests 
that a moment of exper i ence ‘prolif er ates 
into the next [moment] through trans itions 
which, whether conjunct ive or disjunct ive, 
continue the exper i en tial tissue’ (1996: 87). 
Sensing prac tices then shift  atten tion to 
form a tions and processes of exper i ence 
across multiple entit ies within partic u lar 
milieus (cf.  Gabrys 2016a ). 
 Such an approach to sensing prac tices 
clearly links this way of organ iz ing and 
under stand ing exper i ence to a posthu man 
perspect ive. Within a posthu man context, 
exper i ence is no longer conﬁ ned solely to 
human points of interest or inquiry. Instead, 
exper i ences of more- than-humans become 
crit ical to rethink ing how sensory rela tions 
form or are excluded, and the subjects – as 
well as new subjects – that concresce 
through these processes ( Whitehead 1929 ; 
cf.  Feminist Posthumanities ; Braidotti 2006). 
But this is not just a project in attempt ing to 
under stand how a myriad of pre- exist ing 
entit ies perform their discrete sensing 
oper a tions. While the speciﬁ city of organ-
isms and entit ies is no doubt import ant, 
sensing prac tices as a concept equally 
emphas izes the point that these are also 
prac tices that are in trans ition, as James 
( 1996 ) suggests, or in process as Whitehead 
( 1929 ) has else where sugges ted. Th e possi-
b il it ies for one partic u lar type of lichen or 
moss to incor por ate and express registers 
of urban air pollu tion in one city could shift  
in rela tion to other organ isms encoun ter-
ing these processes, the city in which the 
entit ies are located, the devel op ment or 
ruin a tion under way, and a whole host of 
other inter con nect ing factors (cf.  Gabrys 
2012a ). 
 By approach ing sensing diﬀ er ently, not 
as the senses or as a human point of medi-
ation, it is possible to begin to account for 
the ways in which sensing prac tices reson-
ate with partic u lar entit ies and rela tions. 
Sensing is not a project of a human mind 
or organs decod ing external substan tial ist 
phenom ena, as Whitehead would suggest, 
but rather could be under stood as the ways 
in which exper i ence is expressed through 
subjects. Yet this is also a collab or at ive 
under tak ing, and so ‘collab or at ive sensing’ 
( Gabrys 2016a ) is always a key aspect of 
sensing prac tices. Far removed from the 
Cartesian brain in a vat, here collab or at ive 
sensing refers to the ways in which shared 
worlds are felt, sustained and even created 
(cf.  TallBear 2011 ). If we were to return to 
the air pollu tion sensor discussed at the 
begin ning of this entry, we would ﬁ nd that 
the initial delin eation of a sensor detect ing 
stimuli and convert ing those stimuli into 
data is a rather linear and limited conﬁ g ur-
a tion of the sensing work that goes on with 
this tech nos cientiﬁ c device. Sensors do not 
merely capture envir on mental data, but 
rather they are involved in collab or at ive 
sensing prac tices for parsing envir on ments
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
and envir on mental prob lems, as well as 
organ iz ing approaches for how to take 
action and gener ate polit ical responses 
through partic u lar forms of envir on mental 
citizen ship. 
 Sensing prac tices are then diﬀ er ently 
mater i al ized in rela tion to the subjects 
and entit ies, milieus and envir on ments, 
processes and situ ations involved in exper-
i en cing. Distinct aﬀ ect ive and polit ical 
capa cit ies are oper a tion al ized through 
sensing prac tices, where the use of an air 
pollu tion sensor by a citizen sets in motion 
a much diﬀ er ent polit ical traject ory than a 
forest damaged by smog. Sensing prac tices 
are ways of artic u lat ing what matters, of 
signalling an express ive register of rele-
v ance, and aﬀ ect ing and being aﬀ ected. In 
this respect, sensing prac tices are world- 
making prac tices (cf.  Stengers 2011a ). Th ey 
are ways of ‘meeting in a world shared in 
common’ ( James 1996 : 79). Th is common 
world is not so much a place where entit ies 
agree to show up, but rather is a milieu 
among a diversity of milieus that is actively 
made through shared inhab it a tions and 
exper i ences. 
 See also  Animacies; Animism (Limulus); Body 
Without Organs; Ethereal Scent; Feminist 
Posthumanities; Neuronal Aesthetics. 
 Jennifer Gabrys and 
Helen Pritchard 
 SOCIALLY JUST PEDAGOGIES  
 Socially just pedago gies have grown out of a 
crit ical or radical pedago gies move ment, 
includ ing pedago gical prac tices informed 
by Marxist, femin ist and crit ical race theory 
which encour aged a critique of polit ical, 
social, economic and sociocul tural issues 
in educa tion, whilst fore ground ing the 
import ance of trans gress ive trans form a tion 
of the educa tional project. Th e crit ical 
pedago gies liter at ure has largely focused on 
what Freire ( 1972 ) referred to as ‘human-
ising pedagogy’ through demo cratic and 
sociocul tural prac tices which focus on 
inequal it ies and power rela tions and the 
import ance of economic, cultural and polit-
ical parti cip at ory parity ( Fraser 2008 ). 
Socially just pedago gies examine who has 
access to educa tion, what sort of know-
ledges are valued and deval ued, and whose 
voices are prom in ent in educa tion. While 
acknow ledging the import ant contri bu-
tions that these human ist perspect ives have 
had on socially just pedago gies, a crit ical 
posthu man perspect ive builds on this tradi-
tion, but also brings diﬀ er ent foci to socially 
just pedago gies. 
 Posthumanism provides a number of 
product ive and gener at ive ways of consid-
er ing socially just pedago gies. Rosi 
Braidotti ( 2013 ), Karen Barad ( 2007 ,  2015 ) 
and Donna Haraway’s ( 2008 ) works are 
partic u larly pertin ent in think ing about 
how posthu man ism may contrib ute to 
imagin ing socially just pedago gies, as they 
all express a deep concern for social justice 
and socially just prac tices. Braidotti’s 
( 2013 ) notion of moving beyond crit ical 
decon struc tion and critique to altern at ive 
enact ments of becom ing, where power is 
not only seen as limit ing but also as aﬃ  rm-
at ive, has partic u lar relev ance for socially 
just pedago gies. Th is provides the impetus 
for rethink ing learn ing as a creat ive and 
inde term in ate process rather than one 
which has as its object ive acquis i tion ﬁ xed 
bodies 
of 
know ledge. 
Furthermore, 
Braidotti’s ( 2013 ) embod ied and embed-
ded nomadic subject illu min ates the 
poten ti al it ies and becom ings in learn ing 
envir on ments, where exper i ment a tion in 
educa tion gives rise to unfore seen but 
product ive and invent ive processes rather 
than prede ter mined outcomes. Creativity 
is not an inher ent prop erty of indi vidu als,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SOCIALLY JUST PEDAGOGIES 
it is an assemblage; a complex ity of 
networks of human and non- human actors 
which give rise to creat ive learn ing rather 
than 
human 
inten tion al ity. 
Braidotti 
( 2013 ) also alerts us to the prob lem atic 
nature of Cartesian dual isms, such as 
mind/body, nature/culture, human/non- 
human, 
matter/meaning, 
teach ing/
research, theory/prac tice, think ing/doing. 
From a posthu man socially just perspect-
ive, pedago gies would assume a holistic 
and vital perspect ive, which includes both 
parts of these dual isms. 
 Barad ( 2007 ,  2015 ) refers to a ‘yearn ing 
for connec tion, prolonged longing and the 
spark ing of new imagin ar ies’ (2015: 388). 
Although she is refer ring to light ning here, 
these desires for connectiv ity and creat ive 
imagin ar ies are partic u larly apt for socially 
just pedago gies too. Continuing in this 
vein, Barad contin ues ‘Lightning is a lively 
play of in/determ in acy, troub ling matters 
of self and other, past and future, life and 
death. It elec tri ﬁ es our imagin a tions and 
our bodies’ (ibid.). Th is troub ling of self 
and other is a decol on iz ing logic, where 
diﬀ er ence is not seen as essen tial ized, 
foreign, negat ive, separ ate, other, lack, less 
than but rather as aﬃ  rm at ive, entangled, 
inde term in ate, as diﬀ er ence within, and as 
multi pli cit ies. As Barad puts it, ‘Th e self is 
itself a multi pli city, a super pos i tion of 
beings, becom ings, here and there’s, now 
and then’s’ (2014: 176). Haraway’s use of 
Trinh Minh- ha’s ( 1986/7 ;  1989 ) inap pro-
pri ate/d other which means to be ‘in 
crit ical, decon struct ing rela tion al ity, in a 
diﬀ ract ing rather than reﬂ ect ing (ratio)
nality – as a means of making potent 
connec tion that exceeds domin a tion’ 
(2004a: 69) is partic u larly apt for socially 
just pedago gies. Th e inap pro pri ate/d other 
provokes a rethink ing of diﬀ er ence and 
rela tion al ity – as diﬀ er ence within, as well 
as diﬀ er ences among humans and non- or 
other- than-humans. Posthuman socially 
just pedago gies are distinct ive for their 
celeb ra tion of diﬀ er ence as product ive 
rather than seeing it as alter ity. Th e inap-
pro pri ate/d other is an emblem atic ﬁ gure 
for this aﬃ  rm at ive stance where diﬀ er ence 
is seen as a tool of creativ ity rather than as 
an apartheid separ a tion. 
 Haraway’s notions of situ ated know-
ledges (partic u lar and embod ied perspect-
ives of the knower), her compan ion species 
and signi ﬁ c ant others, her notions of ﬂ our-
ish ing and nature cul ture (1991, 2008) have 
partic u lar relev ance for posthu man socially 
just pedago gies which fore ground trans dis-
cip lin ar ity and the import ance of includ ing 
the natural sciences and human it ies, as well 
as more than human others in educa tional 
projects. 
Both 
Braidotti 
( 2013 ) 
and 
Haraway ( 2014 ) emphas ize the import ance 
of prac tices of joy for socially just pedago-
gies which they see as essen tial for living 
in our current times, where possib il it ies 
of ﬂ our ish ing in the Anthropocene have 
become increas ingly comprom ised. Desire 
is also seen not as lack or need but as 
product ive start ing point in the educa tion 
process. 
 A posthu man ist perspect ive allows us 
to think about the eﬀ ects of colo ni al ism on 
pedago gies – a project which has become 
increas ingly urgent in south ern contexts, 
but which is of import ance to north ern 
contexts as well ( Mbembe 2001 ;  Taylor and 
Pacini-Ketchabaw 2015 ). A posthu man 
socially just pedagogy facil it ates a playful 
exper i ment a tion and an aﬃ  rm at ive ethics 
of poten ti al ity, thus provid ing an imagin at-
ive and creat ive way of dealing with 
inequal it ies and forms of colon iz a tion in 
higher educa tion. Posthuman socially just 
pedago gies enable us ‘to devise new, prac-
tical and ethical acts of engage ment which 
motiv ate and enact change in the mater ial 
continuum that consti tutes educa tional 
prac tice’ ( Taylor and Ivinson 2013 : 667). 
Th e 
concern 
with 
respons ib il ity,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
account ab il ity, what matters, making a 
diﬀ er ence and an ethics of care eman at-
ing from new mater i al ist/posthu man 
approaches are novel concerns for a socially 
just pedagogy ( Barad 2015 ). 
 In posthu man socially just pedago gies, 
it is not possible to know before hand what 
will happen in encoun ters ( Massumi 2015a , 
 2015b ). In posthu man socially just pedago-
gies matter is seen as vital and vibrant and 
as having agency and as being ‘mutu ally 
consti tuted’ with the discurs ive ( Lenz 
Taguchi 2013 ;  Phillips and Larson 2013 ). 
Th us what happens in a posthu man socially 
just pedagogy is oft en unex pec ted and acts 
as a cata lyst for some thing new emer ging. 
Also epistem o logy, onto logy and ethics are 
seen as inter twined and not separ ate ( Barad 
2007 ). Posthuman socially just pedago gies 
start from the meta phys ical posi tion that 
chal lenges the assump tions of ﬁ xed diﬀ er-
ences between human and non- human, 
mind and body, matter and discourses. 
Such pedago gies also use diﬀ ract ive rather 
than reﬂ ect ive meth od o lo gies as ‘patterns 
of diﬀ er ence which make a diﬀ er ence’ 
( Barad 2007 : 72). Diﬀ ractive meth od o lo-
gies can be seen as more socially just prac-
tices than critique which pits one set of 
views against another, and which assumes a 
super ior and exter ior posi tion, rather than 
acknow ledging that we are all part of the 
world, situ ated in partic u lar contexts and 
unable to extric ate ourselves, seeing 
ourselves as always and already implic ated 
in matters of concern. A diﬀ ract ive meth-
od o logy sees the value of past, present and 
future contri bu tions to know ledge and is 
an ethical way of care- full reading the 
details of texts, rather than a dismissive 
putting people and their ideas down, which 
Barad sees as epistem o lo gic ally damaging 
( Juelskjær and Schwennesen 2012 ). With a 
diﬀ ract ive meth od o logy, it is possible to 
read the insights from texts, discip lin ary or 
theor et ical posi tions through one another, 
in a product ive way where creat ive and new 
concepts and ideas can be formed. 
 A way of think ing about socially just 
pedago gies from a posthu man perspect ive 
can be summar ized in Haraway’s invoc a-
tion, using the anthro po lo gist Marilyn 
Strathern’s ideas that ‘it matters what 
thoughts think thoughts, what know ledges 
know know ledges, what rela tions relate 
rela tions, what worlds world worlds, it 
matters what stories story stories’ ( Haraway 
2014 ). Th is provoca tion alerts us to the 
vibrancy of matter, the mater ial/discurs ive 
and to the caution that some stories 
normal ize other stories. A posthu man 
socially just pedagogy presents a shift  from 
a concern with the epistem o lo gical, to one 
which directs our atten tion to an entan gle-
ment of the ethico- onto-epistemological 
( Barad 2007 ). Th is shift  fore grounds 
matters of fact with matters of concern and 
matters of care, and a convic tion that 
matter matters. Th ese concerns and those 
of open ness, response- ability provide a 
gener at ive poten tial for socially just 
pedago gical possib il it ies ‘so that we might 
use our ability to respond, our respons ib il-
ity, to help awaken, to breathe life into ever 
new possib il it ies for living justly’ ( Barad 
2007 : 195). 
 See also Diﬀ raction; Mattering; Posthuman 
Critical Th eory; Natureculutures. 
 Vivienne Bozalek 
 SPECULATIVE POSTHUMANISM  
 Posthumanism comes in diﬀ er ent ﬂ avours. 
Th e 
most 
common 
are 
Critical 
Posthumanism 
( CP ) 
and 
Speculative 
Posthumanism ( SP ). Both are crit ical of 
human- centred (anthro po centric) think ing. 
However, their critiques apply to diﬀ er ent 
areas:  CP ques tions the anthro po centrism
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SPECULATIVE POSTHUMANISM 
of modern intel lec tual life;  SP opposes 
human- centric think ing about the long- run 
implic a tions of modern tech no logy. 
 Critical 
posthu man ists 
argue 
that 
Western Humanism is based on a dualist 
concep tion of a rational, self- govern ing 
subject whose nature is self- trans par ent. 
According to Katherine Hayles and Neil 
Badmington, the term ‘posthu man’ is appro-
pri ately applied to a late stage of modern ity 
which the legit im at ing role of the human ist 
subject handed down from Descartes to 
his philo soph ical successors has eroded 
( Badmington 2003 ;  Hayles 1999 ). 
 Whereas crit ical posthu man ists are 
inter ested in the posthu man as a cultural 
and polit ical condi tion, spec u lat ive post-
hu man ists are inter ested in a possib il ity 
of certain tech no lo gic ally created  things . 
If  CP uses ‘posthu man’ as an adject ive,  SP 
nomin al izes the term. 
 Speculative posthu man ists claim that 
 there could be posthu mans : that is, there 
could be power ful non- human agents that 
arise through some human- instig ated tech-
no lo gical process. Another way of putting 
this is to say that posthu mans would be 
‘wide human descend ants’ of current 
humans who have become non- human in 
virtue of a process of tech nical alter a tion 
( Roden 2012 ;  2015 ). 
 Th e term ‘wide descent’ is used to 
describe this histor ical succes sion because 
exclus ive 
consid er a tion 
of 
biolo gical 
descend ants of human ity as candid ates for 
posthu man ity would be excess ively restrict-
ive. Posthuman making could involve 
discrete inter ven tions into the repro duct ive 
process such as genetic engin eer ing, or 
exotic- seeming 
tech no lo gies 
such 
as 
methods of copying and ‘upload ing’ human 
minds onto power ful computer systems. 
 SP 
is 
frequently 
conﬂ ated 
with 
Transhumanism, but it should not be. 
Transhumanists, like clas sical and modern 
human ists, wish to cultiv ate supposedly 
unique 
human 
capa cit ies 
such 
as 
autonomy, reason and creativ ity. However, 
they hope to add the fruits of advanced 
tech no lo gies to the limited toolkit of 
tradi tional human ism, believ ing that pros-
pect ive devel op ments in the so- called 
‘ NBIC ’ suite of tech no lo gies 1 will allow 
humans unpre ced en ted control over their 
capa cit ies and morpho logy ( Bostrom 
2005a ,  2005b ;  Sorgner 2009 ). 
 Transhumanism is thus an  ethical claim 
to the eﬀ ect that tech no lo gical enhance-
ment of capa cit ies like intel li gence or 
empathy is a good thing. 
 SP , by contrast, is a  meta phys ical 
claim about the kinds of things that 
could exist in the world. It does not imply 
that post hu mans would be better than 
humans or that their lives would be 
compar able from a single moral perspect-
ive. One can hold that a posthu man diver-
gence from human ity is a signi ﬁ c ant 
possib il ity but not a desir able one ( Roden 
2012 ). 
 Th is is not to say, of course, that  SP 
lacks ethical and polit ical implic a tions but 
these become appar ent when we have an 
adequate account of what a posthu man 
diver gence (or ‘discon nec tion’) might 
involve. I will return to this issue in the last 
part of the entry. 
 Th ere are no posthu mans (as conceived 
by  SP ). Th us we are currently ignor ant of 
their mech an isms of emer gence. It is 
conceiv able that posthu mans might arise 
in many diﬀ er ent ways, thus a philo soph-
ical posthu man ism requires a  mech an ism- 
inde pend ent account of the concept of the 
posthu man. For example, we should not 
treat mind upload ing as a  sine qua non of 
posthu man ity because we do not know 
that mind upload ing is possible or has 
posthu man- making poten tial. 
 A plaus ible condi tion for any posthu-
man- making event is that the result ing non- 
human entit ies are capable of acquir ing
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
ends and roles that are not set by humans – 
and that this autonomy is due to some alter-
a tion in the tech no lo gical powers of things. 
Given our dated ignor ance of posthu mans 
this claim captures the core of the spec u la-
t ive concept of the posthu man. Th is is 
referred to as the ‘Disconnection Th esis’ 
( DT ). Roughly,  DT states that posthu mans 
are feral tech no lo gical entit ies. Less roughly, 
an agent is posthu man if and only if it can 
act inde pend ently of the ‘Wide Human’ 
( WH ) – the inter con nec ted system of insti-
tu tions, cultures, indi vidu als and tech no lo-
gical systems whose exist ence depends on 
biolo gical (‘narrow’) humans ( Roden 2012 ; 
 Roden 2015 : 109–13). 
 One of the advant ages of  DT  is that 
it allows us to under stand human-
 posthu man diﬀ er ences without being 
commit ted to a ‘human essence’ that post-
hu mans will lack. Rather, we under stand 
 WH  as an assemblage of biolo gical and 
non- biolo gical indi vidu als, whose history 
stretches from the world of Pleistocene 
hunter- gather ers to the modern, inter-
con nec ted world. 
 Becoming posthu man, then, is a matter 
of acquir ing a tech no lo gic ally enabled 
capa city for inde pend ent agency. 
 Th e 
fact 
that 
human–posthu man 
discon nec tion would not result from a 
diﬀ er ence in essen tial prop er ties does not 
entail that it would not be signi ﬁ c ant. Just 
how signi ﬁ c ant depends on the nature of 
posthu mans. But  DT says nothing about 
posthu man natures beyond ascrib ing a 
degree of inde pend ence to them. It is thus 
 multiply satis ﬁ able by beings with diﬀ er ent 
tech no lo gical origins and very diﬀ er ent 
natures or powers (e.g. arti ﬁ  cial intel li-
gences, mind- uploads, cyborgs, synthetic 
life forms, etc.). 
 Nonetheless, one picture of posthu man 
tech no gen esis has had pride of place in 
philo soph ical and ﬁ ctional writing on the 
posthu man. Th is is the prospect of human- 
created arti ﬁ  cial intel li gences (robots, 
intel li gent computers or synthetic life 
forms) acquir ing human intel li gence or 
greater than human intel li gence (super-
in tel li gence) thereby tran scend ing human 
control or even under stand ing. 
 In futur ist thought, this is called ‘the 
tech no lo gical singu lar ity’. Th e term comes 
from a 1993 essay by the computer scient ist 
Vernor Vinge, ‘Th e Coming Technological 
Singularity: How to Survive in the Post- 
human Era’. According to Vinge, a singu lar-
ity would involve accel er at ing recurs ive 
improve ments in arti ﬁ  cial intel li gence ( AI ) 
tech no logy. Th is would come about if the 
relev ant  AI or Intelligence Ampliﬁ cation 
( IA ) tech no lo gies were always ‘extend ible’ 
so that the applic a tion of greater intel li-
gence could yield even more intel li gent 
systems. Our only current means of pro-
du cing human- equi val ent intel li gence is 
non- extend ible: ‘If we have better sex, it 
does not follow that our babies will be 
geni uses’ ( Chalmers 2010 : 18). 
 Given an extend ible tech no logy, human 
or human- equi val ent intel li gences could 
‘extend’ that  AI / IA tech no logy to create 
super hu man intel li gences ( AI +) that 
would be even better self- improvers than 
the earlier  AI s. Th ey could consequently 
make  super- super hu manly intel li gent entit-
ies ( AI ++) and so on ( Chalmers 2010 ). If 
the tech no logy in ques tion were some kind 
of machine intel li gence, this might result 
in an accel er at ing expo nen tial growth in 
machine menta tion that would leave bio-
lo gical intel li gences such as ourselves far 
behind. 
 Th e minds shot out by this ‘intel li gence 
explo sion’ could be so vast, claims Vinge, 
that we have no models for their trans-
form at ive poten tial. Th e best we can do to 
grasp the signi ﬁ c ance of this ‘tran scend-
ental event’, he claims, is to draw analo gies 
with an earlier revolu tion in intel li gence: 
the emer gence of posthu man minds would
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SPECULATIVE POSTHUMANISM 
be as much a step- change in the devel op-
ment of life on earth as the emer gence of 
humans from non- humans ( Vinge 1993 ). 
Humans might be no more able to grasp a 
post- singu lar ity world than mice are able 
to grasp concepts in number theory. Th ey 
would be lost in a world of essen tially 
incom pre hens ible and unknow able gods. 
 But suppose a singu lar ity is not tech nic-
ally possible. Maybe there are hard limits on 
intel li gence (in this universe at least). Maybe 
the scen ario does not adequately nuance the 
notion of intel li gence. Still, Vinge’s scen-
ario  raises a troub ling issue concern ing 
our capa city to eval u ate the long- run 
consequences of our tech nical activ ity in 
areas such as the  NBIC tech no lo gies. Th is is 
because it presup poses a weaker, thus more 
plaus ible, spec u lat ive claim:  our tech nical 
activ ity could gener ate forms of life signi ﬁ c-
antly alien or ‘other’ to ours . 
 If posthu man life could be signi ﬁ c antly 
alien or ‘weird’ then we might not be in a 
posi tion to under stand it easily, making 
the eval u ation of prospect ive discon nec-
tions prob lem atic. Do we insist on adopt-
ing a humans- ﬁ rst perspect ive on our 
tech nical activ ity even though we, or our 
wide descend ants, may cease to be human? 
Critical posthu man ism implies that the 
priv ileging of human life is ille git im ate. 
But what if – as Vinge fears – we may be 
simply unable to under stand the things we 
(our descend ants) might become? 
 Much depends, here, on the scope for 
posthu man weird ness. Do we have an  a 
priori (hence future- proof) grip on how 
strange our posthu man successors could be? 
 Th ere are two opposed perspect ives on 
this: 
an 
anthro po lo gic ally 
bounded 
posthu man ism ( ABP ) and an anthro po lo-
gic ally unboun ded posthu man ism ( AUP ). 
 ABP  states that there are tran scend ental 
condi tions for agency that humans would 
neces sar ily share with posthu mans in 
virtue of being agents at all. 
 For example, maybe all serious agency 
requires mastery of language or the ability 
to parti cip ate in social prac tices. Perhaps 
all agents must be capable of pleas ure and 
pain, must apply Kant’s categor ies or be 
Heideggerian  Dasein . If so, there are limits 
to posthu man weird ness and the extent to 
which posthu mans can exceed our under-
stand ing. 
 Do we have evid ence for such 
constraints? If we don’t, we should adopt 
an  unboun ded posthu man ism accord ing to 
which there are no future- proof grounds 
for viewing posthu mans as agents of a 
partic u lar kind.  AUP has the discom fort-
ing consequence, though, that we could 
only eval u ate the ethical perspect ives of 
posthu mans by encoun ter ing or becom ing 
them. 
 If  AUP is right, human ists and 
transhuman ists have seri ously under es-
tim ated the inhu man ism our tech no lo-
gical predic a ment (Roden 2014: ch. 7). We 
are not yet in a posi tion to eval u ate the 
ethics of posthu man ity, but we can only 
do so by precip it at ing an event whose 
consequences are incal cul able this side of a 
discon nec tion.  AUP and  DT jointly imply 
that there can be no general ethics of the 
posthu man, only multiple lines of  posthu-
man becom ing and exper i ment a tion with 
posthu man forms of life and being. At this 
point, argu ably, the perspect ives of  CP  and 
 SP converge. 
 See also Computational Turn; Artiﬁ cial 
intel li gence; 
Critical 
Posthumanism; 
Rationalist Inhumanism; Transhumanism/
Posthumanism; Xenofeminism. 
 Note 
 1.  NBIC 
stands 
for ‘Nanotechnology, 
Biotechnology, Information Technology, 
and Cognitive Science’. 
 David Roden
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
SS = SECURITY/SURVEILLANCE
 SS = SECURITY/SURVEILLANCE  
 Security/surveil lance is rooted in beliefs 
of anthro po centric mastery and control, in 
beliefs of unob struc ted human access to 
and control over the ‘actual’, which is the 
start ing point for outlining posthu man 
predic a ments of secur ity. Th ere are two 
lines along which to map these predic a-
ments. Th e ﬁ rst is a ques tion of know ledge 
and the de- cent ring of human control and 
certainty. Th e second is a ques tion of 
objects or predic a ments of ‘the actual’ 
subjects/objects of secur ity pursuit. On both 
counts, histor ies of global north secur ity/
surveil lance could be read as describ ing 
quick en ing more- than-human sens ib il it ies. 
It is not that secur ity/surveil lance was not 
more- than-human before, but that the 
contem por ary moment ﬁ nds the decent-
ring of the human and human know ledge 
at the fore front of oﬃ   cial prac tice – inde-
term in acy in human decision- making is 
acknow ledged and constitutive of secur ity/
surveil lance culture (e.g. the infam ous 
‘unknown unknowns’ of the war on terror 
announced by former  US  Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld) and secur ity 
objects are consti tuted through complex 
and 
inde term in ate 
more- than-human 
assemblages (e.g. digital networks, of acute 
secur ity concern, are consti tuted through 
ﬁ bre- optic cables, data, traﬃ  c ﬂ ows, users, 
ideas, private compan ies, national legal 
land scapes and so on). 
 Most 
boldly, 
secur ity/surveil lance 
ambi tions are char ac ter ized by the follow-
ing (and the degree to which any of these 
char ac ter ist ics are new is an open ques-
tion): a pre- emptive mandate to act early 
on imagined, spec u lat ive futures; pres sure 
to ‘connect the dots’ of poten tial events 
before they occur; collec tion and analysis 
of massive amounts of data oft en through-
out the unfold ing spaces of every day life; 
faith and invest ment in tech no lo gical and 
algorithmic analyt ics; desire for seam less, 
‘inter op er able’ access to inform a tion across 
all manner of im/mater ial borders, and the 
pre- emin ence of circu la tion as that which 
is to be protec ted and a means through 
which secur ity/surveil lance is pursued (see 
 Amoore 2013 ;  Massumi 2015c ;  Cowen 
2014 ). Th e spatial and temporal depth of 
secur ity/surveil lance satur a tion is thus 
immense. Anticipated futures colon ize the 
present and the spaces of every day life are 
indi vis ible from such eﬀ orts to ‘connect 
the dots’ of poten tial future events, just 
as attempts are made to suture gaps and 
cracks across borders, juris dic tions, the 
public and private and so on ( Amoore and 
de Goede 2008 ). It is not simply that the de- 
cent ring of human know ledge and control 
are recog nized but that uncer tainty is the 
grounds on which secur ity/surveil lance 
eﬀ orts are consti tuted – embolden ing 
rather than dimin ish ing as ever more 
spaces, times, subjects and objects might be 
drawn into secur ity assemblages. 
 Th us, secur ity/surveil lance sights are 
oft en trained upon future poten tials, on 
what bodies may become capable of. Th is 
applies across the ﬁ eld of data bits, 
indi vidual iden tit ies and persons, through 
to complex networks and assemblages. 
Objects of secur ity pursuit – borders, 
trans port networks, non- state based terror 
networks, digital networks, infra struc tures, 
pandem ics, ecosys tems – are engaged as 
emer gent, circu lat ory, irrupt ive milieu (e.g. 
 Elbe, Roemer-Mahler and Long 2014 ). 
Subjects/objects of secur ity pursuit take 
form through the capa cit ies and poten ti al-
it ies of bodies enmeshed in and consti-
tuted in more- than-human ways. What 
does this do to the ﬁ gure of the human? 
Louise Amoore writes that the data- driven, 
risk- based, 
spec u lat ive 
frames 
of 
algorithmic model ling are ‘indiﬀ er ent to 
the speciﬁ city of persons, places and 
events’ (2011: 30) and are rather concerned
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SS = SECURITY/SURVEILLANCE 
data points. Th e indi vidual, the personal 
narrat ive even, recedes such that ‘the data 
deriv at ive is not centered on who we are, 
nor even on what our data says about us, 
but on what can be imagined and inferred 
about who we might be – on our very 
procliv it ies and poten ti al it ies’ (ibid.: 28). 
 Given this state of aﬀ airs, partic u-
larly with much atten tion given to techno- 
fetish ism in secur ity and strands of post-
hu man thought that priv ilege tech no lo gical 
innov a tion and satur a tion, there is a 
strong tempta tion to histor icize the present 
as a posthu man moment distinct from 
before. But this must be complic ated. 
Not least because we could ask, ‘When was 
the human  not inex tric ably entwined in 
mater ial, tech no lo gical and inform a tional 
networks’ ( Braun 2004 : 271)? But also 
because embra cing such histor icism is 
ethic ally 
and 
polit ic ally 
prob lem atic. 
Technological quick en ing and advance 
must be held in tension with other elements 
of more- than-human secur ity assemblages; 
to not do so risks reify ing the powers of 
secur ity/surveil lance states. 
 First, tech no lo gical priv ileging risks 
lending credence to the abdic a tion or 
dislo ca tion of respons ib il ity for secur ity 
decisions. Techno- secur ity visions enjoy 
claims of clean machine vision, which, it is 
said, does not discrim in ate but simply 
analyses the data, accesses the actual truth 
of the matter through data. Decision and 
design are displaced in indi vis ible and 
inac cess ible meshes of analysts, algorithms, 
secrecy, data, juris dic tional divides and so 
on. Th is creates a condi tion in which it 
is very diﬃ   cult to locate and contest 
decisions, to parse respons ib il ity. Th us, one 
ques tion is to ask how account ab il ity can 
be inter rog ated in complex mater ial, tech-
no lo gical, inform a tional assemblages? And 
to consider how secur ity/surveil lance 
optics beneﬁ t from attend ing to the human 
as ‘never itself’, as enmeshed envir on-
mental/bodies in form a tion. 
 Second, fore ground ing tech no lo gical 
and inform a tional advances gives too much 
credit to secur ity/surveil lance assemblages. 
Th e brochures of secur ity tech no logy 
compan ies, for example, are more- than-
human master pieces, detail ing products 
that ‘will’ seam lessly integ rate tech no lo gies, 
systems, data ﬂ ows, envir on mental and 
‘situ ational’ factors, human analysts and 
decision- making processes. Th e current 
buzzwords are ‘inter op er ab il ity’ and ‘situ-
ational aware ness’, which could perhaps be 
seen as posthu man terms of art, suggest ing 
as they do elegant hybrids of human, tech-
no logy, envir on ment. Th ey suggest a more- 
than-human actor that sees all without gap 
or preju dice and seam lessly makes unde-
cid able secur ity decisions. Th is is, of course, 
not the case. While not discount ing the 
depth and reach of such forces, nor the 
more- than-human consti tu tion of secur ity/
surveil lance, the ﬁ ssures, cracks, inab il it ies 
and incon sist en cies of such states are just as 
crucial to this consti tu tion and to a more- 
than-human under stand ing of becom ing. 
Inconsistencies, gaps, impossi b il it ies and 
fail ures are as much a part of secur ity 
assemblages as data points, satel lites and 
intel li gence agents. 
 It is crucial to ask what secur ity/surveil-
lance optics gain by embra cing the fact that 
the human was and is ‘never itself’ ( Braun 
2004 , citing  Wolfe 2003 ); that the human, 
both as secur ity decider and locus of suspi-
cion, is enmeshed in multiple bodies in 
form a tion. It would seem that powers of 
secur ity/surveil lance gain quite a bit by 
embra cing open- ended and expans ive 
imagin a tions of becom ing, at the same time 
that obstacles to secur ity control are inher ent 
to the open- ended becom ing of the world. 
Th is is the start ing point for inter rog at ing 
the gener at ive inde term in acy constitutive of 
posthu man secur ity/surveil lance.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 See also Algorithmic Studies; Stateless 
State; War. 
 Stephanie Simon 
 STATELESS STATE  
 Th e concept of the state less state emphas-
izes the dual meaning of the concept of the 
 state . On the one hand, the term ‘state less’ 
refers to those peoples strug gling for the 
right to self- determ in a tion who are denied 
an inde pend ent nation- state of their own. 
On the other hand, the concept of ‘state’ 
refers to a ‘state of mind’. So the ﬁ rst 
addresses the concept of the state as a 
 construct , whereas the second refers to the 
state as a  condi tion . Assembled together, 
the  state less state names the condi tion and 
prac tice of those living without the state – 
either because they are denied a state of 
their own, or because they reject the very 
struc ture of the state all together (see also 
 Staal 2014a ,  2014b ). 
 Professor Jose Maria Sison, founder of 
the Maoist Communist Party ( CPP ) of the 
Philippines and its armed wing, the New 
People’s Army ( NPA ), emphas izes the 
import ance of the role of art and culture in 
the context of the state less state. Th e 
Filipino revolu tion ary move ment, born 
out of the resist ance against Spanish and 
 US occu pa tion, controls large pieces of 
land through out the country; its aim is to 
liber ate its peoples from imper i al ism and 
feud al ism, but at the same time it aims to 
strengthen the national conscious ness of 
the peas ants, working poor and indi gen-
ous peoples whose language, history and 
symbols risk being erased as a result of the 
decades of foreign occu pa tion. In this 
regard Sison writes that: ‘Th e local cultures 
and the devel op ing national culture must 
be cher ished and aﬃ  rmed and integ rated 
into a revolu tion ary national conscious-
ness in order to serve national liber a tion 
and do away with the stul ti fy ing sense of 
subser vi ence to foreign domin a tion ( Sison 
and Staal 2013 : 37). 
 Th rough visual art, theatre, poetry, liter-
at ure and music the cultural conscious ness 
of a nation under occu pa tion is main tained; 
and thus the revolu tion ary Filipino struggle 
simul tan eously attempts to change the 
mater ial condi tions of society, while also 
strength en ing the cultural conscious ness 
in prepar a tion of a new one. Th e latter is 
referred to by the Filipino revolu tion ar ies 
as ‘cultural work’. Within the state less state 
of the revolu tion ary move ment cultural 
work essen tially takes the form of a 
(temporal)  altern at ive to the state . Whereas 
those living within a recog nized state 
outsource the main ten ance of art and 
culture to the admin is trat ing arms of a 
given regime, within the state less state this 
demands an ongoing process of cultur al iz-
a tion and politi ciz a tion. Culture is a weapon 
that builds the revolu tion ary conscious ness 
neces sary for a people to eﬀ ect ively recog-
nize and oppose its oppress ors. Poet 
Ericson Acosta, himself jailed several times 
for his cultural work, explains: ‘It’s about 
ﬁ nding a way to use visual mater i als in 
union educa tion or using songs to agitate 
the ranks. Th e revolu tion ary move ment in 
fact has a strong tradi tion of revolu tion ary 
worker and peasant songs . . . Th e activ ists 
imme di ately under stood the decis ive role 
of art, liter at ure, and music in build ing 
resist ance’ (ibid.: 98). 
 We see a similar import ant role of art 
and culture in other revolu tion ary organ-
iz a tions, such as the National Liberation 
Movement of Azawad ( MNLA ), led by the 
Kel Tamasheq (trans lated as ‘those who 
speak the language of Tamasheq’), better 
known as the ‘Tuareg’. Th e  MNLA is 
rooted in the long history of resist ance to 
French occu pa tion of the Sahara and the 
Sahel, and later on, against their forced
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STATELESS STATE 
integ ra tion into the state of Mali. From 
1960 on, the year of Malian inde pend ence, 
the Kel Tamasheq rebelled in demand of 
their own autonomy, most recently in 
2012, when the organ iz a tion declared their 
inde pend ent state of Azawad in the north-
ern part of the country, one and a half 
times the size of France. Writer and  MNLA 
repres ent at ive Moussa Ag Assarid says: 
 I have met many men and women who 
ﬁ ght for educa tion and art, who make 
beau ti ful works in the form of the calli-
graphy that now covers our city and 
declares itself part of Azawad, and great 
poets who roam the streets and speak to 
the chil dren. In the  MNLA  we have 
women and men who make history. And 
our history is now; it is construc ted day 
by day. Every element, every person, each 
ﬁ ghter is an actor in our common Azawad. 
 Assarid and Staal 2013 : 42 
 Similar to the Filipino leader Professor 
Sison, who famously wrote that ‘the guer illa 
is a poet’ ( Sison 2013 ), Ag Assarid emphas-
izes how the revolu tion ary struggle is 
simul tan eously a cultural struggle, calling 
each politi cized subject in the struggle for 
inde pend ence an ‘actor’. Th e Kel Tamasheq 
do not ﬁ ght merely with arms, but through 
a politi ciz a tion of their own history, 
language and cultural symbol ism that they 
have had to defend over decades from 
foreign occu pa tion. In this regard, Ag 
Assarid mentions partic u larly the work of 
the Kel Tamasheq band Tinariwen (trans-
lated as ‘Deserts’), which consists of former 
revolu tion ary ﬁ ght ers who travel the world 
to narrate the history of the revolu tion 
through their own language and tradi-
tional music. Ag Assarid explains: 
 Tinariwen is . . . unique in that their music 
is passed on through cassette tapes. Th e 
cassettes are the weapons that make our 
message travel: a message of revolt, but 
also a message of peace. In times of revolt, 
the music reminds us of our goal of peace. 
In times of peace, we are reminded of the 
revolt that laid its found a tion.  
 Assarid and Staal 2013 : 42 
 In the case of the Kurdish revolu tion ary 
move ment – occu pied by what the 
Kurdistan Workers Party ( PKK ) has 
named the ‘inter- colony’ of Kurdistan, the 
land of the Kurds being separ ated through 
the coun tries of Turkey, Syria, Iraq and 
Iran – the notion of the state less state as 
enacted through cultural work gains addi-
tional import ance due to the fact that their 
struggle for self- determ in a tion has come 
to reject the concept of the nation- state 
alto gether. Co- founded by women and 
men in 1978, Abdullah Öcalan and Sakine 
Cansiz being the best known today, the 
 PKK grew quickly through its eﬀ ect ive 
guer rilla struggle against the Turkish state 
into a mass move ment in the 1980s. 
 Initially 
groun ded 
on 
Marxism-
Leninism, the  PKK aimed at estab lish ing 
an inde pend ent Kurdish nation- state. But 
women in the ranks of the guer ril las felt 
margin al ized from the struggle along the 
way, due to the fact that many men did 
not recog nize them as equal ﬁ ght ers and 
expec ted them to dedic ate them selves to 
care work instead. Öcalan, who had been 
the polit ical leader of the  PKK from 
the start, suppor ted the women’s move-
ment to develop autonom ously within the 
 PKK  in order to protect their stake in 
the revolu tion. 
 Both Öcalan and the women’s move-
ment concluded that the struc ture of the 
nation- state essen tially consists of the 
culmin a tion of patri archy and capit al ist 
imper i al ism. A repres ent at ive of the 
Kurdish Women’s Movement, Dilar Dirik, 
in this light rhet or ic ally asks: ‘Could we 
have a nation- state, a concept inher ently 
based on capit al ism and patri archy, and 
still think of ourselves as liber ated?’ ( In der 
Maur, Staal and Dirik 2013 : 52).
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
Öcalan and the women’s move ment was 
the emer gence of ‘demo cratic confed er al-
ism’, or what Öcalan calls ‘demo cracy 
without the state’:  state less demo cracy 
(ibid.: 99). It is groun ded on prin ciples of 
self- governance, gender- equal ity, the right 
to self- defence, cultural co- exist ence and 
communal economy. Practised in large 
parts of Bakûr (North Kurdistan, Turkey) 
and the total region of Rojava (West 
Kurdistan, Syria), it has developed as a 
paral lel struc ture to exist ing states as well 
as fully autonom ous regions under control 
of communes, coun cils and cooper at ives. 
Dirik explains it as follows: 
 [Democratic Confederalism] considers 
the ques tion of how to build an altern at-
ive to the state – for and by the people – 
inde pend ent of the inter na tional order, 
while also taking into account the speciﬁ c 
oppress ive regimes of the region. Th is is 
why the insist ence is always on regional 
govern ments and regional autonomy, 
even though the model of demo cratic 
confed er al ism is proposed for the entire 
Kurdish region. 
 ibid.: 43 
 Similar to the Filipino revolu tion ar ies and 
the National Liberation Movement of 
Azawad the role of art and culture is 
prom in ent in the Kurdish revolu tion ary 
move ment. Th e fact that Kurdish language, 
liter at ure and music was banned under the 
regimes that occu pied its lands for decades 
increas ingly politi cized Kurdish culture 
through out the struggle. Diﬀ erent from 
the cases of the Filipino and Azawadian 
inde pend ence move ment, the Kurds no 
longer strive for a state of their own – the 
state less state, in which cultural work plays 
a key role, instead has become a  perman ent 
condi tion. Even when autonomy is won, 
there is no state to outsource one’s history 
to, and thus the role of the artist is not 
merely import ant as a substi tute for the 
state, but found a tional in main tain ing the 
state less state. Nesrin Botan, vocal ist of the 
Kurdish band Koma Botan in Rojava, 
explains the role of culture in the Kurdish 
move ment as follows: 
 We have an import ant role in the revolu-
tion . . . Th is revolu tion gives us the 
oppor tun ity to express our culture, art, 
and folk lore that used to be suppressed. 
We are now working hard for our culture 
and iden tity. Like a musi cian receives 
educa tion from school, our ﬁ ght ers learn 
the art of ﬁ ght ing in the People’s 
Protection Units [the people’s army of the 
Kurdish Rojava region,  JS ]. Like a teacher 
of art, our warri ors show perform ance on 
the battle ﬁ eld. 
 ibid.: 242 
 In Botan’s words we hear the echoes of 
Sison and Ag Assarid – musical cassettes 
are  weapons ; the  guer rilla is a poet; the 
 ﬁ ghter  a teacher of art . . . All of them 
describe the artist as a worker who contri-
b utes to uphold ing the narrat ives and 
convic tions of those who are margin al ized, 
dispos sessed and perse cuted by the 
occupy ing state. Th e cultural worker is an 
educator, agit ator and organ izer, all in 
order to main tain and to enact – to 
perform – the symbolic universe of the 
unac know ledged state that is not so much 
an admin is trat ive entity as a collect ive 
condi tion. 
 Th e long cultural struggles of the 
Filipino, Kel Tamasheq and Kurdish 
peoples has created a state in itself, a 
detailed network of refer ences, histor ies 
and symbols that deﬁ ne a people’s iden tity 
far beyond what a state could ever contain. 
Th is is the  art of the state less state . 
 See also Art; Political Aﬀ ect; Lampedusa; 
Violence; War. 
 Jonas Staal
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STATIC GLOW 
aft er the person it relates to is dead, such as 
the so- called Facebook ‘ghost proﬁ les’; 
accounts owned by the deceased that 
continue to appear in ‘Friends’, ‘Suggestions’ 
and, some what more disturb ingly, ‘Birthday 
Reminders’. 
 Example: Her  static glow still lingers 
aft er four years. 
 Static Glow became notori ous with the 
quint es sen tial scene that pres ages horror 
in the ﬁ lm  Poltergeist : a  TV set hisses while 
the black and white ﬂ ick er ing static glows 
in the dark room. Th e juxta pos i tion of 
stasis (static) and move ment (glow) 
reﬂ ects the tension between the desire to 
remem ber and the neces sity to forget that 
under lines the eeri ness of encoun ters with 
our ‘undead media’ (Chun 2011b: 134). 
 Ghost proﬁ les became a phenomenon 
in the early MySpace days, when the medi-
at ized violent murders of teenage girls in 
the  US  led strangers to comment on the 
proﬁ les of the tragic ally deceased, and 
even some times to create  RIP tribute 
proﬁ les. Nowadays the infam ous Facebook 
algorithms gener ate ghostly encoun ters 
with Birthday Reminders or timely place-
ments of photo graphs of the deceased in 
our Timeline Memories. Th ese and similar 
phenom ena are the object of what has 
been called digital death, digital aft er life or 
death online studies, which consider the 
partic u lar 
inter ac tion 
and 
iden tity 
construc tion engendered by linger ing data 
in the context of mourn ing ( Gibson 2007 ; 
 Walter et  al. 2011 ;  Maciel and Carvalho 
Pereira 2013 ;  Gotved 2014 ;  Klastrup 2014 ; 
 Lagerkvist 2016 ). Th e notion of the aban-
doned site is embed ded in the incep tion of 
the World Wide Web. Th e growing 
cemetery has been indexed by the Internet 
Archive since 1996, and is already inscribed 
within histor icit ies of ‘digital folk lore’ 
( Lialina and Espenschied 2009 ). 
 Media Afterlife: An Inherent Aspect 
of Media History 
 Th e history of media tech no logy is deeply 
entangled with the attri bu tion of super-
nat ural power to commu nic ate with or to 
repres ent the dead. Th e notion of eman a-
tion that mani fests aft er excit a tion accounts 
for much of what has histor ic ally haunted 
media ( Sconce 2000 ).  Static Glow is also 
inspired by the aft er glow produced by 
phos phor es cence that eman ates from a 
 CRT screen aft er the tele vi sion is turned 
oﬀ . Such examples go as far back as the 
Shroud of Turin and Veronica’s Veil, and 
have bloomed since the devel op ment of 
new tech no lo gies in the late 19th century. 1 
Media’s ghosts are epitom ized by the prac-
tices of spirit photo graphy and spir itu al ism, 
both expli citly linking the aft er life through 
the  medium of the emer ging tech no logy of 
the time. Spirits were commu nic ated with 
through the spir itual tele graph and  captured 
on a gelatin silver print. 2 Th e exper i ence of 
looking at a photo graph or watch ing a ﬁ lm 
is described as watch ing and being watched 
by spectres ( Barthes 1980 ;  Derrida and 
Stiegler 1996 ). Media are perceived as a 
means to commu nic ate with the oppos ite 
bank of the River Styx. Th e tradi tion con-
tin ues in networked compu ta tion with 
‘computer- based discarn ate entit ies’ or 
cyber- spirits ( Collins 2004 ). Th e multiple 
data traces every user leaves behind further 
augment this ghostly anthro po morph iz a-
tion. Th e ques tion might not be whether 
humans are perpetu ated through networked 
data archives, but  how  that data is reused. 
 Th e proﬁ le of a dead person can be 
forgot ten, but its remains in the data base 
may be integ rated into new iden tity and 
re- brand ing models. A ghost’s allure, for
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 Figure 1.  Screenshot of Christine’s MySpace profi le (circa 2007).  
 Figure 2.  Figure 2. Screenshot of Christine’s MySpace profi le (circa 2015).
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STATIC GLOW 
example, may change with web fashion re- 
design trends. Christine’s MySpace proﬁ le 
lives on, ten years aft er she was killed by a 
drunk driver.  3 In the years follow ing her 
death, the site was peri od ic ally active with 
mourn ing comments, and gener ally used 
as a memorial by her parents (see Figure 1). 
Ten years later, MySpace has completely 
redesigned its inter face, and consequently 
the face of Christine’s online posthum ous 
pres ence (see Figure  2). Th e result is an 
uncanny pres ence, patches of fossil ized 
content with a slick new inter face bearing 
the recog niz able default settings. Christine’s 
static glow is ten years strong at the time 
of writing.  
 Static Glow as Commodity 
 For commer cial providers an aban doned 
proﬁ le is at best an inact ive proﬁ le; however, 
when the amount of inact ive proﬁ les aﬀ ect 
the possib il ity to sell space for targeted 
advert ising, plat form providers will attempt 
to close inact ive accounts. At worst, a 
deceased person’s proﬁ le becomes a liab il-
ity when the plat form provider uses the 
user- gener ated content for advert ising 
campaigns and risks becom ing exposed by 
using images of a deceased person, or when 
the proﬁ le is vandal ized by users who are 
aware of the death of the person. Reason 
enough to start regu lat ing the digital estate. 
 As our lives started to play out online, 
plat forms became a growing archive for 
our life events. From teenage party ing over 
our ﬁ rst love to the birth of our chil dren, 
and the passing of our parents and friends, 
these docu ments became archives of 
highly personal value. Th is value is being 
monet ized 
by 
compan ies 
provid ing 
services to preserve our online life, luring 
us with a notion of an immor tal memento 
and prom ising to posthum ously let us 
keep our place in the social graph of our 
life. Pioneer vendors such as  LIVESON , 
Eternime and  ETER 9 paved the way for 
continu ous pres ence through virtual 
immor tal ity. 
 If static glow is an indic a tion of popular-
ity, the highest form of eman a tion could be 
the posthum ous holo gram, such as those 
developed by Hologram  US for Patsy Cline, 
Liberace, and Whitney Houston (see 
 Kleinman 2015 ). Occasionally, these are 
developed ‘prehum ously’ for such person al-
it ies as rapper Chief Keef and WikiLeaks 
founder Julian Assange as a means to 
circum vent territ ori ally bound laws. 4 Rosi 
Braidotti has expan ded Mbembe’s ( 2003 ) 
deﬁ n i tion of necro pol it ics to an ‘oppor-
tun istic exploit a tion of the life of you’ 
( Braidotti 2013 : 123). Th is exploit a tion now 
contin ues aft er death, as posthum ous data 
is also subject to commodi ﬁ c a tion. From 
the Holy Grail to Tupac Shakur’s paten ted 
holo gram onstage appear ance, immor tal ity 
is a hot commod ity. 
 With social network ing sites projec ted 
to include more dead users than live ones 
in the not too distant future, 5 could 
humans be anom alies in a web of ghosts? 
In addi tion to these increas ing posthum-
ous agents, most proﬁ le or account activ ity 
seems to follow the infam ous 80/20 rule, or 
the Pareto Principle. Th at is to say, around 
80 per cent of proﬁ les or accounts on the 
 WWW are inact ive. Th ese may be owned 
by dead people, though usually they are 
created by people who have set up an 
account once and never returned, or  bots . 
For example, what surfaced through the 
Ashley Madison data leak (an online 
dating service for married people), 6 is how 
many of the online ‘engagers’ were actu ally 
bots, programmed to engage with hetero-
sexual men ( Newitz 2015 ). 7 
 Not only do our traces live on aft er we 
die in data bases asso ci ated with our 
proﬁ les and desisted accounts, but more 
and more data is being created and capit al-
ized upon from inter ac tions with bots, bots
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
inter act ing with dead data, the recyc ling 
of our data for new iden tit ies and 
inter ac tions, and the outsourcing of our 
com  mu nic a tion to soft  ware applic a tions. 
We also increas ingly use bots to help us 
with our email conver sa tions, or responses 
to comments in our social media proﬁ les. 
Th ese bots continue the conver sa tions 
posthum ously on our behalf.  8 
 ‘Necro- ﬁ nan cial iz a tion’ and the desire 
for immor tal ity could prove to be a strong 
motiv a tion for such canni bal ism ( Samson 
2015 ). 
Technological 
infra struc ture 
embed ded within commer cial ecolo gies 
also facil it ates various forms of static glow. 
Th e inter net’s infra struc ture of redund-
ancy and its propaga tion- oriented code 
also contrib ute to static glow. Videos, 
images and texts gener ated by or about the 
user are copied, stored and re- distrib uted 
beyond the user’s edit or ial control. Th ere 
are so many ways in which traces can be 
archived, shared, re- used, corrup ted, sold, 
rehashed and ulti mately given new  life . 
Inevitably,  necro- ﬁ nan ci ers will render 
calcul able the capa city in which static glow 
posthum ously eman ates over time.  
 Measuring Static Glow 
 Static glow could be calcu lated by using a 
formula for expo nen tial decline (‘Forgetting 
curve’,  Ebbinghaus 1885 ). However, while 
unat ten ded memory does fade expo nen-
tially or gradu ally into obli vion, the calcu la-
tion must include vari ables for incid ents 
of activ at ing or refresh ing memory (e.g. 
anniversar ies). Additionally, static glow is 
aﬀ ected by the social graph of a person. 
Fans, commit ted friends or a profes sional 
network might aﬀ ect the static glow in the 
long run as the strength of the memory is 
stronger in this group. It is also aﬀ ected by 
the contri bu tions a person made during 
her life, as they can also trigger the activ a-
tion of memory. A book might be re- issued, 
or works might be refer enced, exhib ited or 
presen ted in other contexts. 
 To calcu late the static glow ( SG ) over 
time (t), the rela tion of the common group 
of people (a) multi plied by the expo nen tial 
decline of memory (e) with the occa sional 
atten tion from the closer group of fans, 
friends and family (1- α )e −t/t2  plus the occa-
sional stim u la tion of memory (Stim) or by 
the activ ity of bots (B). Th e entire calcu la-
tion could be executed as shown in 
Figure  3, where S common  and S fan are the 
respect ive strengths of the memory in the 
common and fan group. A stronger 
memory in this context leads to a slower 
fade of the static glow. 9 
 Referring to Georg Franck’s notion of 
the atten tion economy (1999), we can state 
that the static glow marks its expan sion 
and meas ur ab il ity into the period aft er a 
person has died. Th e static glow becomes 
the meas ure ment for memory as it is still 
kept alive on various web plat forms. Social 
graphs, and data gener ated over a life time 
online, such as achieve ments and contact 
lists, are the basis for the commodi ﬁ c a tion 
of our social life beyond the end of our 
biolo gical one. As Michel Serres foresaw, 
with these tech no lo gies death is domest ic-
ated, it has become  cultural (2001). Th e 
 Figure 3.  Static glow formula.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STORIED MATTER 
formula above might serve as the calcu lat-
ing model that determ ines the value of a 
person’s aft er life and answer the ominous 
ques tion: how long will  my  static glow 
linger? 
 See also  Algorithm; Algorithmic Studies; 
Digital Rubbish; Obsolete Technologies; 
Necropolitics; Zombie.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
but a story – a story in which we are 
immersed, to which we belong, and out of 
which we arose’ (2011: 2). In a key way, 
then, ‘life itself is made of stories’ ( Wheeler 
2014 : 77) through which ‘mean ings are 
diﬀ er en tially enacted’ ( Barad 2007 : 139). In 
this process, life is continu ally recon-
ﬁ gured, regu larly reveal ing new chapters as 
in the case of ‘genes and fossils chronic[ling] 
an amazing story of life on Earth’ ( Chaisson 
2005 : 299). Th is amazing earthly story 
always issues from the multiple encoun ters 
of biomes, geolo gical and micro scopic 
realms, as well as cultural spaces and liter-
at ure, which can be compel lingly aﬃ  rm at-
ive or unex pec tedly disrupt ive. As a living 
text with a rich narrat ive eﬃ  c acy, matter 
slides through human ‘express ways’ oft en 
unnoticed but always exert ing its inﬂ u ence 
in concep tual and mater ial habit ats, like 
Lowell Duckert’s ‘slip pery’ arctic ice that is 
‘alive, creaturely, and desir ing’ (2013: 71). 
Ice or a stone, a fossil frag ment or bacteria, 
no matter which form it takes, matter yields 
terrestrial tales of resi li ence, creativ it ies, 
uncer tain ties, evol u tion and dissol u tion in 
non- determ in istic ways. 
 Spread across a wide spec trum of its 
organic and inor ganic forms, matter’s 
dynamic express ive ness is more than a 
mean ing ful commu nic a tion among living 
organ isms, like bacteria commu nic at ing 
within and between species using ‘quorum 
sensing language’ (signalling molecules 
used for commu nic a tion). Eloquence is the 
deﬁ n ing prop erty of all matter beyond the 
biolo gical world. Th at is, all agen cies, from 
subatomic particles to cosmic forces, are 
storied subjects of an ever- unfold ing onto- 
tale. Chemical substances circu lat ing in 
the biosphere, for example, or plastic bags 
invad ing the oceans and choking marine 
life, are as express ive as bacteria and more 
complex organ isms such as plants, animals 
and humans. Even ‘life less’ entit ies like 
elec trons can be said to have a certain 
degree of creat ive expres sion when they 
commu nic ate non- locally. In other words, 
being storied is as much a trait of the so- 
called non- living matter as of biolo gical 
organ isms and sentient beings. As eco- 
phenomen o lo gist David Abram puts it 
lyric ally, ‘tumbling water falls’, ‘dry river-
beds’, ‘gusts of wind’, ‘freshly painted 
houses’, ‘rusting auto mo biles’, ‘cumulous 
clouds’, ‘gran itic cliﬀ s’, ‘diamonds’, and 
‘grains of sand’ (2010: 272) are all express-
ive, and thus epitom ize storied matter in its 
diﬀ er ent mani fest a tions. If we are ‘dwell ing 
within a community of express ive pres-
ences’, as Abram claims (ibid.: 173), then 
we need to be attent ive to their stories and 
their more- than-human mean ings forged 
in matter’s storied dimen sion. 
 Storied matter compels us to think 
beyond anthro po centri city and about our 
coex ist ence and coevolu tion in the story of 
the earth itself. It is, there fore, import ant to 
acknow ledge matter in its broad range of 
expres sions as a ‘ site of narrativ ity ’ ( Iovino 
and Oppermann 2012a : 83) with ongoing 
conﬁ g ur a tions of signs and mean ings that 
we inter pret as stories. Th ese stories come 
to matter in the form of evol u tion ary 
histor ies, climatic narrat ives, biolo gical 
memor ies, geolo gical records, species 
tragedies and  DNA poetics. What makes 
matter storied is ‘narrat ive agency’, which is 
a non- linguistic perform ance inher ent in 
every mater ial form a tion from bodies to 
their atoms making them telling or storied. 
Whether it is a cell, a singing whale, a whis-
per ing wind, a pebble on the beach, an 
erupt ing volcano, a hurricane or a plastic 
bag, matter is encoded with mean ing ful 
narrat ives, or narrat ive agen cies through 
which the world becomes eloquent. 
‘Storied matter is thick with narrat ives,’ 
concurs Jeﬀ rey Cohen, ‘some vivid, some 
barely legible, others impossible to trans-
late’ (2015b: 275). Th us under stood, storied 
matter is not a mere concep tu al iz a tion,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
STORIED MATTER 
mater ial agen cies mean ing ful exist ence. On 
the contrary, it repres ents a new ecology of 
under stand ing the ulti mate onto logy of a 
mean ing fully artic u late planet. Th e fossils, 
for example, tell stories of extinct beings 
captured in time. Volcanoes tell stories 
about the earth’s turbu lent past. Tree rings 
yield stories of long years of droughts and 
rains, while retreat ing glaciers trans mit 
stories of chan ging ecosys tems and climate, 
blend ing global warming with polit ical 
anxi et ies and social changes. Since narra-
tive agen cies emerge through their inter-
changes with the human reality – such as 
rocks and moun tains with geolo gical 
records reveal ing stories of dynamic 
fusions with animals, plants and humans 
– they all ‘tell us evol u tion ary stories of co- 
exist ence, inter- depend ence . . . extinc tions 
and surviv als’ ( Iovino and Oppermann 
2014b : 7). Th at is why, when we speak of 
‘storied matter’, we are not only using a 
mater ial meta phor, but acknow ledging its 
narrat ive agen cies as active co- authors that 
shape this world and co- determ ine our 
exist ence. Serenella Iovino oﬀ ers a palp-
able example of how this mutual shaping 
of the world unfolds in the narrat ives, 
bodies and land scape of Pompeii: ‘while 
the bodies . . . narrate about an almost 
forgot ten complex ity (the site of the 
ancient Pompeii), the lava . . . narrates 
about the forgot ten orographic struc ture 
of this site, inhab ited by volcanic and 
seismic agen cies, even though it was 
believed to be ‘simply’ a moun tain’ (2016: 
26). Conceived in this way, storied matter 
helps us better under stand fragile ecosys-
tems, polluted land scapes, carbon- ﬁ lled 
atmo sphere, acid i fy ing oceans, chan ging 
climate, retreat ing glaciers, species extinc-
tions and social crises than the scientiﬁ c 
data presen ted in ﬁ gures and numbers. 
Simply because through these stories we 
come to know ‘not only . . . the hidden plots 
and mean ings of a reality, but also . . . 
the oft en unheard voices of this reality’ 
(ibid.: 48), which has today become quite 
disen chanted with cata strophic human 
prac tices. 
 Th inking about storied matter in a 
disen chanted world means think ing seri-
ously about how our invas ive economic 
prac tices produce plan et ary cycles of 
pollu tion, how our polit ical decisions and 
cultural mean ings are enmeshed in their 
produc tion, and how they all enfold into 
one indis sol uble process. Th e mater ial 
stories narrat ive agen cies convey today are 
profoundly troub ling, like the trau matic 
tales of plastic- choked birds on Midway 
Island, and of count less plastic objects that 
compose the infam ous Great Paciﬁ c 
Garbage Patch. Th ey are narrat ive agen cies 
demon strat ing the dire consequences of 
the social and the natural inter pen et rat ing 
each other in the slow death of so many 
marine species. Th ey call for our attent ive-
ness to the stories of destruc tion and 
pollu tion, but at the same time they compel 
us to imagine altern at ive stories of wind or 
water ener gies for a better future. In such 
a case, the narrat ive agen cies of storied 
matter would be the primary authors of 
envir on mental sustain ab il ity and ecolo-
gical sens ib il ity, oﬀ er ing a better image for 
the living world and a better discern ment 
of human–non- human encoun ters. If we 
read the world this way, as storied mater i-
al ity that binds all beings, forces and 
substances with inter con nec ted stories, we 
can answer frequently posed ques tions 
posit ively, such as: can storied matter assist 
us in build ing disan thro po centric prac-
tices in a world facing poten tially cata-
strophic impacts from climate change? 
Can it move human ity into more earth- 
friendly modes of think ing? Can it change 
our energy systems, and help imple ment 
policies of solar, water and wind energy in 
the near future?
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
storytelling culture, it can play an import-
ant role in bring ing the state of the world 
more to public aware ness, and we can 
impart new ideas and insights about our 
exper i ences and percep tions of the planet. 
Because storied matter induces ‘out- of-
the- box’ think ing, which is exactly what 
is needed today to develop solu tions to 
our current prob lems and to build post- 
anthro po centric discourses. Hence, giving 
matter access to artic u la tion by way of 
stories that co- emerge with the human is 
not only a way to eman cip ate matter from 
silence and passiv ity, but also to liber ate our-
 selves from the images, discourses and prac-
tices of our own Cartesian dream world. 
 See 
also 
Econtology; 
(Material) 
Ecocriticism; 
Neo/New 
Materialism; 
Ecomaterialism. 
 Serpil Oppermann 
 SURVIVAL  
 In the Stomach of the Predators 
 Nature meets itself in the stomach of the 
 pred at ors. 
 In the stomach it creates disasters & 
 produces demands. 
 it creates disasters & produces demands; 
 it makes people super ﬂ u ous. 
 In the stomach it creates disasters & 
 produces demands. 
 It makes nature super ﬂ u ous. 
 In the Stomach of the Predators  was a two- 
part exhib i tion by Berlin- based artists, 
curat ors and theor ists Alice Creischer and 
Andreas Siekmann explor ing the pred a-
t ory logic of advanced capit al ism. Stemming 
from their joint research concern ing the 
privat iz a tion of the commons through the 
cases of seeds, land rights and intel lec tual 
prop erty, the two distinct bodies of work 
exhib ited employ the methods and lan-
guages of theat rical and ﬁ lmic stagings 
(Creischer) 
and 
pictorial 
tableaux 
(Siekmann). 
 Th e install a tion of Siekmann takes us to 
the Norwegian island of Spitsbergen where 
the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, a project set 
up to ‘protect’ all exist ing agri cul tural 
kernels in the world from even tual extinc-
tion, is based. We learn, however, that the 
seed bank is ﬁ nanced by the very same 
corpor ate lobbies that exer cise interests 
and prac tices that threaten crop diversity, 
includ ing, among others, genetic manip u la-
tion. Th ese entangled compli cit ies are 
uncovered through large move able panels 
with picto grams, remin is cent of the vocab-
u lary developed by science philo sopher 
and polit ical econom ist Otto Neurath in 
cooper a tion with artist Gerd Arntz, who 
was a part of an anarcho- syndic al ist move-
ment in the 1920s in Cologne and Berlin, 
devel op ing graphic icons speciﬁ c ally for 
prolet arian agit a tions. Th e ordered, system-
atic and metic u lously struc tured succes sion 
of signs, symbols and their visu al ized inter-
con nec tions draw an alarm ing rela tional 
map of the economic and polit ical aspects 
of biod iversity’s trans fer into private hands 
that so accur ately deﬁ nes our global present. 
 Creischer’s work contains a cast of a 
number of whim sical, symbol ic ally charged 
animal ﬁ gures – the wolf, the hyena, the 
bear and the jackal – each of them repres-
ent at ive of a partic u lar form of mono pol iz-
a tion of what was once the common good. 
Th e animals are sent on a journey from 
Spitsbergen to Benin and Istanbul, during 
which they encounter situ ations that seem 
absurd and at times outright grot esque. 
Such surreal scenes are continu ously stabil-
ized, however, by an under cur rent of real 
gravity as the char ac ters delve into the 
disquiet ing work ings of the neolib eral 
condi tion. Th e creatures are emblem atic of,
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SURVIVAL
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
and person ify, acquis it ive greed paired 
with injustice and devast a tion; through 
them multiple scripts unfold, delivered in a 
variety of vernacu lars, at once resem bling 
the Chaplinian slap stick hand lings of 
despair and the theat rical exper i ment a-
tions of Bertolt Brecht. While address ing 
the apoca lyptic ques tions of global gene 
pool herit age, land grabbing, the devast a-
tion of natural resources and the fant ast ical 
‘science’ of ﬁ nan cial spec u la tion, art itself 
– and its possib il ity to counter systemic 
viol ence of such amplitude – is not spared 
ques tion ing. Th ough the work tests art’s 
subvers ive poten tial, its compla cency in the 
face of the ﬂ ows of capital surfaces at least 
as oft en as the para dox ical meaning of 
survival in an era of human- engin eered 
cata strophes. 
 In the Stomach of the Predators was 
presen ted at  BAK , basis voor actuele kunst, 
Utrecht, as part of the year- long research 
into the notion of ‘survival’ within the 
long- term series  Future Vocabularies 
(2014–16). Th e series enquires into the 
possib il ity of art to oﬀ er a space for devel-
op ing a variety of itin er ar ies for envi sion-
ing another future. 
 See also Anthropocene; Capitalocene and 
Chthulucene; Exclusion Zone; Resilience; 
Anthropocene Observatory; Extinction. 
 Alice Creischer and 
Andreas Siekmann 
 SYMBIOGENESIS  
 Mixotricha para doxa was discovered in the 
hindgut of an Australian termite. At the 
time the oddity of this protist or euka ryotic 
microbe was its posses sion of both the 
ﬂ agella that typic ally provide micro bial 
loco motion and a ‘coat of cilia disposed in 
closely packed trans verse bands’ that drove 
 Text and images are from the work  In the Stomach of the Predators , Alice Creischer and Andreas Siekmann, 2013.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SYMBIOGENESIS 
it through its liquid medium: ‘In general 
appear ance, and partic u larly in the pres-
ence of both cilia and ﬂ agella, this form is 
quite unlike any described termite para site’ 
( Sutherland 1933 : 163, 165). Th ree decades 
later research ers equipped with elec tron 
micro scopes determ ined that Sutherland 
had erred in her descrip tion of the ‘para-
dox ic ally mixed- up hairs’ of  Mixotricha 
para doxa : ‘these struc tures are not cilia but 
adher ent spir o chetes. Th ey do not move in 
the manner of cilia, with altern ate eﬀ ect ive 
and recov ery strokes, but instead undu late, 
exactly as spir o chetes do’ ( Cleveland 
and Grimstone 1964 : 670–1). Th e earlier 
‘paradox’ of two distinct, seem ingly 
redund ant kinds of loco motory organ elles, 
both cilia and ﬂ agella, now yielded to 
another conun drum. How could adher ent 
spir o chetes – proka ryotic hitch hikers with 
no phen o typic connec tion to their host – 
arise in this instance to a state of start lingly 
eﬀ ect ive 
loco motory 
co- ordin a tion? 
Moreover, these authors noted, ‘Th e util iz a-
tion of spir o chetes as a method of loco-
motion does not appear to have been 
repor ted in any other organ ism’ (ibid.: 681). 
 Absent from either Sutherland’s or 
Cleveland and Grimstone’s texts is the term 
 symbi osis . However, this term is prom in ent 
in the American micro bi o lo gist and evol u-
tion ary theor ist Lynn Margulis’s ﬁ rst book, 
 Origin of Eukaryotic Cells (1970). Th is 
work oﬀ ered a stark chal lenge to an earlier 
evol u tion ary consensus holding that the 
euka ryotic or nucle ated cell evolved due 
to an accu mu la tion of random single-
 point muta tions selec ted for in some ur- 
proka ryote somehow giving rise to a 
nucleus binding its genome, and that the 
other euka ryotic organ elles (mito chon dria, 
cilia, chloro plasts) then emerged by gradual 
diﬀ er en ti ation from that nucleus. Margulis 
argued, instead, that through ‘serial 
endosym bi osis’ the evol u tion of the euka-
ryotic cell along with its distinct organ elles 
came about by the multiple assem blies, one 
by one, of diﬀ er ent free- living proka ryotic 
precurs ors. Th ese entered the euka ryotic 
consor tium intact, as endosym bionts (‘living 
together on the inside’), and then developed 
oblig ate genetic and meta bolic inter re la tions 
with the evolving cell as a whole. In addi-
tion, she contin ued, even tu ally a pre- mitotic 
ur- euka ryote also evolved the repro duct-
ive machinery of mitosis, and this, too, she 
theor ized, was an adapt ive outcome of the 
symbio gen etic acquis i tion of spir ochetal 
motil ity turned inward to conduct the 
moving parts of the mitotic process. 
 Chapter 6 of  Origin of Eukaryotic Cells , 
‘Symbiosis’, 
has 
a 
strik ing 
epigraph 
marshalling  Mixotricha as a repres ent at ive 
for symbi osis in general with a long quota-
tion from Cleveland and Grimstone’s 
paper focused speciﬁ c ally on the organis-
mal motil ity that arises from  Mixotricha ’s 
rela tions with its spir o chete compan ions. 
Th ey are not para sites, merely free load ers. 
Technically termed ectosym bionts (‘living 
together on the outside’), the banded 
masses of spir o chetes that adhere to 
 Mixotricha form a motil ity symbi osis, 
propelling this large and lumber ing protist 
much more ener get ic ally than it could ever 
muster ‘on its own’. But for all prac tical 
purposes of biolo gical viab il ity, the protist 
lives on its spir o chetes as much as they live 
on it ( Margulis and Guerrero 1991 ). Th e 
symbi otic consor tium of the euka ryotic 
protist and half a million proka ryotic 
spir o chetes is a speciﬁ able ‘indi vidual’ in 
the form of what is now called a  holo bi ont 
( Margulis 1993 ;  Bordenstein and Th eis 
2015 ). In subsequent decades Margulis 
would advert to  M. Paradoxa as the ‘poster 
protist for symbio gen esis’ ( Margulis and 
Sagan 2007 : 45), a general evol u tion ary 
process of speci ation more funda mental 
than genetic muta tion – the emer gence of 
new kinds of organic beings through the 
genetic binding of symbi otic part ners.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
sleeve, and contrary to an exclus ively 
compet it ive- pred at ory view of living rela-
tions,  Mixotricha models nature’s good 
nature. Margulis spent the rest of her life 
devel op ing this new account of evol u tion-
ary innov a tion.  Acquiring Genomes: A 
Th eory of the Origins of Species  ( Margulis 
and Sagan 2002 ) repor ted the ﬁ ne details of 
her invest ig a tions on this research front. 
But one can get a quick ﬁ x on this topic 
from her memoir  Symbiotic Planet . Here 
she under scores that at the end of the last 
century propos ing symbio gen esis as a 
major evol u tion ary dynamic was still a 
radical act. While her account of the 
endosym bi otic origin of the euka ryotic cell 
had achieved main stream accept ance by the 
later 1980s, ‘the idea that new species arise 
from symbi otic mergers among members 
of old ones is still not even discussed in 
polite scientiﬁ c society’ ( Margulis 1998 : 6). 
 Th ings have changed in Margulis’s 
favour in the two decades since that 
remark ( Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber 2012 ). 
But the resid ual scientiﬁ c resist ance to 
grant ing due signi ﬁ c ance to the concepts 
 Mixotricha paradoxa . Image  MX 27–2   from the Lynn Margulis Lab, taken by 
elec tron micro scop ist David Chase, year unknown.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
SYMBIOGENESIS 
of both symbi osis – ‘the system in which 
members of diﬀ er ent species live in phys-
ical contact’ ( Margulis 1998 : 5) – and 
symbio gen esis – ‘the origin of new tissues, 
organs, organ isms – even species – by the 
estab lish ment of long- term or perman ent 
symbi osis’ (ibid.: 6) – tells us some-
thing about their bona ﬁ des as posthu man-
ist tropes ( Clarke 2015 ). Symbiogenesis 
in partic u lar is an aﬀ ront to the human-
ist  ideal of an essen tial human ity 
composed of uniquely human indi vidu als. 
Symbiogenesis under scores the ecolo gical 
multi pli city of all living arrange ments 
taken to their biolo gical found a tions. 
Biological ‘indi vidu al ity’ is always the 
collect ive accom plish ment of a holo bi ont. 
Individuality emerges ‘from the community 
inter ac tions of once inde pend ent actors’ 
( Margulis 1998 : 10–11). Another way to 
put this is that symbi osis and symbio gen-
esis stress the social ity of biolo gical 
systems. Th e discourse of posthu man ism 
fore grounds the recip rocal of this rela tion-
ship – the biolo gical dynam ics of social 
systems – once one’s view of biolo gical 
rela tions has under gone posthu man ist 
recon struc tion. Margulis’s erotic vision of 
life conduces to such revi sions: living 
beings natur ally lust for increas ingly inti-
m ate prox im it ies in increas ingly outland-
ish envir on ments. In her long evol u tion ary 
view of this process, ‘Symbiogenesis was 
the moon that pulled the tide of life from 
its oceanic depths to dry land and up into 
the air’ ( Margulis 1998 : 111). 
 See also Body Without Organs; Ecosophy; 
Kin; Multispecies; Naturecultures; Planetary. 
 Bruce Clarke
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
living beings, tech nical objects have a 
genesis, and this genesis is part of their 
being ( Simondon 2012 : 22). Th e treat ise 
starts out by criti ciz ing the tend ency to see 
culture 
and 
tech nics 
as 
oppos ites. 
According to Simondon, the xeno phobic 
rejec tion of tech nical reality is based on a 
miscon cep tion of the nature and essence 
of machines. Th is failure leads to alien a-
tion, or else, to tech no pho bia, tech no philia 
or intem per ate tech no cratic ambi tions, 
which are all inad equate reac tions towards 
machines (ibid. 9–10). Simondon, instead, 
conceives the exist ence of humans and 
machines as correl at ive (ibid.: 16). Humans 
and machines are mutu ally related; they 
imply and comple ment each other. 
Technical objects inter vene as medi at ors 
between humans and nature, and humans 
inter vene as medi at ors between machines. 
 As Simondon sees it, machines are 
beings that operate (ibid.: 192). To ﬁ rmly 
grasp tech nical reality in its entan gle ments 
with humans and nature, we need to 
consider tech nical being in its oper at ive 
func tion ing, and not as things or arte facts 
with ﬁ xed char ac ter ist ics. ‘Technicity’ for 
Simondon has to do with the perform ance 
or the manner of acting of tech nical 
objects. Th e ‘essence’ of a tech nical object 
– say, a motor – is not this or that motor 
but a certain ‘scheme of oper a tion’ that 
remains more or less stable and recog niz-
able through an evol u tion ary lineage from 
the ﬁ rst motors to the motors of today (23, 
53). Th e current relev ance of Simondon’s 
work on tech no logy has precisely to do 
 TECHNICITY  
 Posthumanist approaches chal lenge the 
onto logy of human ity by ques tion ing its 
separ ate ness. Th e shift  to rela tional and 
proces sual onto lo gies recon ﬁ g ures the 
human as irre du cibly entangled, and to an 
increas ing extent, as co- evolving with tech-
no logy. While tradi tion ally conceived as 
external to being, contem por ary approaches 
are grant ing tech no logy a new role in 
know ledge and exist ence by point ing to its 
involve ment in processes of becom ing (for 
example Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, 
Don Ihde, Donna Haraway, Bruno Latour, 
Bernard Stiegler, Karen Barad and Peter-
Paul Verbeek). Technology’s compli city in 
being is not, however, an alto gether new 
topic. It was famously explored by Martin 
Heidegger, as well as by other thinkers 
whose works are currently being reappraised 
(for example Henri Bergson, Ernst Cassirer, 
Gaston Bachelard and André Leroi-
Gourhan). Among the thinkers receiv ing 
renewed 
crit ical 
atten tion, 
Gilbert 
Simondon (1924–89) stands out as partic u-
larly note worthy, oﬀ er ing a genetic onto logy 
of tech nical objects. 
 Simondon’s seminal treat ise on tech no-
logy,  Du mode d’existence des objets tech-
niques (1958), was published as a comple-
ment ary thesis to his main doctoral thesis,1 
where he devel ops his theory of indi vidu-
ation. Drawing on the latter, the treat ise on 
tech no logy conceives tech nical objects in 
dynamic terms, as some thing that under-
goes a process of becom ing. Much like 
 T
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TECHNICITY 
with the fact that it oﬀ ers an oper a tional 
theory of tech no lo gical medi ation. 
 Despite 
his 
talk 
about 
essences, 
Simondon breaks away from substan tial ist 
notions of iden tity, includ ing the hylo-
morphic variety (see  Metastability ). First, a 
tech nical essence owes its origin to an act 
of inven tion. To begin with the tech nical 
object is ‘prim it ive’ and discon nec ted. Yet it 
contin ues to be inven ted, to evolve in ways 
that are not completely fore seen by the 
inventor(s). Second, a tech nical essence is 
fecund. It evolves by engen der ing a series of 
vari ations or a ‘family’ of tech nical objects 
(51–3). A tech nical object ‘exists . . . like a 
speciﬁ c type obtained through a conver gent 
series’ (26) 2 that, in Simondonian parlance, 
progresses from an ‘abstract’ to a ‘concrete’ 
mode of exist ence. A tech nical essence 
evolves through a process of indi vidu ation 
(see  Metastability ), which in the case of 
tech nical objects is further speciﬁ ed as a 
process of ‘concret iz a tion’. An evolved tech-
nical object is more ‘concrete’ than a prim it-
ive or ‘abstract’ tech nical object, in that its 
elements are more func tion ally coher ent, 
approach ing the internal coher ence of living 
being. In addi tion to that, and again in 
analogy with living being, it incor por ates 
parts of the natural world into its system by 
enter ing into a rela tion with its envir on ment 
( milieu ). Th us, through the process of 
concret iz a tion, the tech nical object loses its 
arti ﬁ  cial char ac ter and approaches the mode 
of exist ence of natural objects. In becom ing 
more concrete, the tech nical object comes 
closer to consti tut ing a natural system; it 
‘natur al izes itself’ by incor por at ing parts of 
the natural world into its regime of func-
tion ing 
(57). 
Challenging 
estab lished 
distinc tions, Simondon refers to the process 
of concret iz a tion as ‘a natural tech nical evol-
u tion’ (52). 
 Th e evolved tech nical object is char ac-
ter ized by its ener getic coup ling to an asso-
ci ated envir on ment. It is here – in its 
concep tion of the way the tech nical object 
relates to its envir on ment – that Simondon’s 
oper a tional approach demon strates its 
true capa city to over come entrenched 
patterns of think ing. For the concret iz ing 
inven tion is not simply an adapt ive reac-
tion to a pre- exist ing envir on ment. Concre-
 tization, rather, is a process that ‘condi tions 
the birth of an envir on ment’, which in turn 
becomes ‘the condi tion of possib il ity of the 
func tion ing of the tech nical object’ (68). 3 
In Simondon’s view, tech nical being is 
self- condi tion ing – but only in a very 
pecu liar sense, since it is at once condi tion 
and condi tioned. Technical being creates 
around itself a certain regime of natural 
elements that it depends on for its func-
tion ing – which means that it condi tions 
the asso ci ated envir on ment just as much 
as it is itself condi tioned by it. 
 Despite his acknow ledge ment of the 
construct ive role of the tech nical object, 
Simondon main tains that the asso ci ated 
envir on ment is not fabric ated. Th e asso ci-
ated envir on ment is a ‘third’ or ‘mixed’ 
envir on ment that is at once tech nical and 
geograph ical, and that acts as a ‘medi ator of 
the rela tion between fabric ated tech nical 
elements and natural elements in which the 
tech nical being func tions’ (70). 4 On the 
same grounds, he claims that the tech nical 
oper a tion is not arbit rary. Simondon’s focus 
on oper a tions provides an escape from the 
dilemma of caus al ity and ﬁ nal ity. Certainly, 
machines are made for a purpose; but as 
Simondon makes clear, through the process 
of indi vidu ation ‘this external ﬁ nal ity is 
erased to the beneﬁ t of the internal co-
her ence of the func tion ing’ (167). 5 Nor can 
the process of tech nical indi vidu ation be 
explained in terms of caus al ity in its ordin-
ary sense. It is the analogy with living beings 
that provides a way out of the dilemma. 
Concretization is ‘organic’ in the sense that 
the system tends toward internal coher ence. 
Technical elements integ rate them selves in a
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
‘tech nical indi vidual’ much like organs are 
integ rated in a living body. Further, like a 
living body in its envir on ment, the tech nical 
indi vidual consti tutes a system where ‘a part 
of the natural world . . . inter venes as a 
condi tion of func tion ing’ (56). 6 Th e evolved 
tech nical object consti tutes a circu lar regime 
of causes and eﬀ ects, or more precisely, a 
system ‘in which there exists a multi tude of 
recip rocal caus al it ies’ (23). 7   Like a vault that 
is not stable until it has been completed, the 
tech nical oper a tion main tains itself by 
virtue of the mutual forces of its constitu ent 
func tions. As a consequence, the progress 
of tech nical genesis can only be arrived at in 
invent ive leaps beyond given reality, through 
an internal redis tri bu tion of func tions that 
augments the total perform ance of the 
system and that resolves antag on isms 
between the elements in the prim it ive distri-
bu tion. Th e tech nical object progresses, in 
other words, through invent ive anti cip a tion 
where, as Brian Massumi poet ic ally puts it, 
‘the past eﬀ ect ively swings over into a futur-
ity of func tion ing’ (Massumi, in  De Boever 
et al. 2012 : 30). 
 To come to terms with tech ni city, we 
need to consider tech nical being not only in 
 analogy with living being but also in its 
 coup ling with it. Technical being requires 
living being; it requires the human in its 
double capa city as a living being and as a 
being that under stands the func tion ing of 
machines ( Simondon 2012 : 175). It is a 
mistake, there fore, to use auto mat ism as 
an indic ator of perfec tion in machines. A 
machine that oper ates without continu ous 
input from an oper ator is severely limited in 
its func tion ing and possible uses. With a 
view to achiev ing true tech nical perfec-
tion,  redu cing human inter ven tion to a 
minimum is not a goal. Th e true indic ator of 
perfec tion in machines, rather, is the level of 
tech ni city, which ‘relates to the fact that the 
func tion ing of the machine harbours a 
certain margin of inde term in a tion’ (ibid.: 
12).  8 Th us, while a purely auto matic machine 
is closed upon itself and prede ter mined in 
its func tion ing, a perfect machine is an open 
machine char ac ter ized by a high degree of 
freedom in its func tion ing. It is only by 
virtue of this open ness that a machine is 
sens it ive to exter ior inform a tion, and hence, 
capable of being grouped together with 
other machines in a coher ent way, consti tut-
ing what Simondon refers to as a ‘tech nical 
ensemble’. Even in this case, where machines 
hook up with machines, the human is not 
rendered super ﬂ u ous: ‘the ensemble of open 
machines assumes the human as perman ent 
organ izer and as living inter preter of 
machines in rela tion to each other’ (12).  9  
 See also  Metastability; Naturecultures; 
Non-human Agency; Ontological Turn; 
Process Ontologies.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TECHNOANIMALISM 
 9. ‘l’ensemble 
des 
machines 
ouvertes 
suppose l’homme comme organ isateur 
perman ent, comme inter prète vivant des 
machines les unes par rapport aux autres’. 
 Aud Sissel Hoel 
 TECHNOANIMALISM  
 Can we one day design a machine that is 
indis tin guish able from the animal? Th is is 
the ques tion that drove René Descartes, 
four hundred years ago, to his widely inﬂ u-
en tial Animal-Machine hypo thesis. 1 Th is 
etho lo gical hypo thesis (etho logy is the 
study of animal beha viour – see  Animal ) 
claimed that animals, like other machines, 
were assemblages of parts and as such he 
rejec ted the idea that animals are able to 
attain a degree of ration al ity; animals do 
not ‘think’ and their beha viour is not in any 
way similar to human action. Nicolas 
Malebranche, second ing Descartes, took 
this idea a step further, claim ing that the 
cries and groans of this animal- machine 
point to its mech an ical fail ures (its 
‘cogwheels’) rather than to its joy or sorrow. 
 Built upon the idea that one needs the 
human brain to think, this Cartesian hypo-
thesis extends well into our time. For 
although the life sciences and related discip-
lines today are very much inter ested in how 
actu ally all animal life pursues a ‘kind of’ 
think ing, having a brain that somehow 
resembles the human brain is, accord ing to 
many scient ists, still regarded a neces sity. 
Much of animal beha viour is still ascribed 
to animal instinct (innate non- reﬂ ect ive 
beha viour), developed in its contem por ary 
form by Konrad Lorenz and Nicolaas 
Tinbergen in the 1950s. And this idea of 
‘instinct’ still shows a deep Cartesian belief 
in human ism: it considers animal beha viour 
still predom in antly as mech an ic ally. Th is 
becomes all to obvious when highly complex 
animal beha viour, when executed by ‘brain-
less’ cyto plasm, causes ﬁ erce discus sions in 
major scientiﬁ c communit ies, as a fairly 
recent discus sion in  Nature (12 May 2005 
issue) shows. Th e discus sion (between 
Rüdiger Wehner and Dan-E Nilsson et al.) 
concerned the cubozoa, also called box 
jelly ﬁ sh or sea wasp (though these creatures 
are neither of the family of the jelly ﬁ sh nor 
of the wasp). Cubozoa move most eleg antly 
and rapidly and react with great reﬁ ne ment 
to their envir on ment (they are ﬁ erce 
hunters). Th ey have an elab or ate sensory 
appar atus most remark able for the complex 
eyes that include very soph ist ic ated camera 
lenses that come very close to our own. But 
the idea that these complex eyes and its 
complex beha viour were possible without 
there being a central, uniform nerve system 
(as with us humans) seemed to exclude the 
idea that this animal could think or feel, or 
exper i ence joy or sorrow. 
 Examples like the cubozoa make us 
wonder what this ‘machine’, as Descartes 
proposes it, is all about. And what makes it 
unﬁ t to ‘think’, feel and exper i ence, like we 
(humans) do? In his  Discourse  Descartes is 
quite clear on this as he gives us two reasons 
for this. First of all machines could not 
under stand language. It would prob ably be 
able to talk, Descartes already envi sions, 
but to follow a conver sa tion ‘as even the 
dullest men can do’, and to give some sort of 
an ‘emphatic’ response, seems impossible 
accord ing to him. Second, as machines only 
act from the dispos i tion of their organs, 
they are unable to make a rational choice, 
to inter pret and to compare. It is for this 
reason 
that 
machines, 
accord ing 
to 
Descartes, can never be ‘creat ive’, can never 
spec u late and come up with ‘a new idea’. 
Consequentially their actions, however 
complex mech an ic ally speak ing, are still 
severely limited when compared to what 
the  cogito  (the human ‘I think’) can do.
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
thought. Th e ‘Turing Test’, as developed by 
Alan Turing in 1936, is an imit a tion game 
which prac tises the Cartesian method 
by compar ing computer intel li gence to 
human intel li gence (more or less repeated 
in John Searle’s Chinese Room exper i-
ment). Also Hubert Dreyfus’ icon ical book 
 What Computers Can’t Do from 1972 
(smartly rewrit ten in as  What Computers 
Still Can’t Do in 1979), gives a reﬁ ned over-
view of how the discus sions on Artiﬁ cial 
Intelligence ( AI ) are strug gling with this 
(Cartesian!) idea of the human mind, 
showing us once more that Descartes’ 
human ism still domin ates not only our 
ideas on what human think ing is, but also 
why ‘the ideas’ of machines and animals 
are still only to be considered  in rela tion to 
the Cartesian rational mind. 
 At the start of the twenty- ﬁ rst century we 
ﬁ nd ourselves living in an age in which both 
the animal (through the ecolo gical crisis) 
and the machine (through the digital crisis) 
force us to change our beha viour and to 
funda ment ally rethink the idea of the 
human and the role it plays in the world. 
And it is through the arts, more than 
anything else, that we have explored the 
possib il it ies of escape from the Humanism 
that suﬀ oc ates us more and more (see  Art ). 
Challenging these extremely power ful ideas 
‘requires all of the resources of art, and art of 
the highest kind’ (Deleuze and Guattari 
1987: 187). But art is not needed for 
critiquing the Cartesian hypo thesis, but 
rather for occupy ing it (see  Occupy ), by 
pushing it to its extreme (as Bergson would 
have it), thus ques tion ing in various ways 
our ideas of ‘think ing’, of ‘emotion’, ‘conscious-
ness’ and ‘other ness’, to name just a few 
import ant concepts at stake. Being occu pied 
by what ‘the tech noan imal’, as we will mater-
i al ize the Cartesian hypo thesis from now on, 
can do, means  being occu pied with the tech-
noan imal. In other words: art poses many 
ques tions in regard to how these mech an ical 
cries and groans ‘work’, how we are aﬀ ected 
by its presumed indi vidu al ity and how we 
care and perhaps inter act with it. 
 Over a longer period of time, the work 
of Tove Kjellmark dealt with tech noan im-
al ism, giving rise to another type of anim-
al ity (see also  Postanimalism ), another type 
of nature but above all very delic ately 
playing the aﬀ ects of the involved audi-
ence. Most strik ingly is the video perform-
ance  Naked , where we are confron ted with 
a mech an ical toy panda that most of us 
(grown- ups) would not care for too much. 
It makes odd sounds and move ments that 
should somehow resemble the sounds and 
move ments that baby pandas make, but 
these qual it ies have been ‘human ized’ in 
the sense that they are supposed to aﬀ ect 
us humans the way our own spouse aﬀ ects 
us more so than resem bling the baby 
panda which it seems to refer to. Yet again, 
as it does not imitate its ‘original’ too 
success fully, most of us, I assume, would 
hardly be ‘touched’ by the toy when in a 
conven tional situ ation (a toy shop, a child’s 
room). 
 Th at changes when the toy panda is 
placed in a diﬀ er ent situ ation in which its 
‘life’ is ‘at stake’, as in this perform ance. Th e 
toy shop or the chil dren’s room, where 
mimick ing is its ulti mate goal, is very 
diﬀ er ent from the oper a tion room, with its 
knives, its medical special ists, its clean and 
white envir on ment. Th e move ments and 
the sounds, which seemed so banal at ﬁ rst, 
now rapidly gain in their appeal to reality 
as the pathetic clum si ness of the panda all 
of a sudden comes awfully close to the 
unpleas ant ness and the fear ful ness we all 
recog nize from being in the oper at ing 
theatre. Th e aﬀ ects produced have radic-
ally changed, and only seem to increase in 
their power as the perform ance contin ues.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TECHNOANIMALISM 
about taking oﬀ  the toy panda’s skin with 
the greatest possible preci sion. We could 
endlessly discuss the various diﬀ er ent 
signs being created as the proced ures takes 
place, as the knives care fully remove the 
fur from the paws, the glue from the eye. 
Th e name of the perform ance,  Naked , 
nicely captures the ambi gu ity as it poses 
the ques tion at what moment the panda is 
truly naked (perhaps being liber ated from 
the skin is all about releas ing the mech an-
ism from its ‘toy iden tity’?). Much more 
urgent, however, is the ongoing and – we 
need to mention this again – very  care fully 
carried out surgery on this toy panda that 
 keeps on making unpleas ant sounds and 
clumsy move ments. Even the surgeon is 
not at all at ease with the situ ation. At times 
he seems very nervous, even cutting 
himself in the glove, and actu ally admit ted 
aft er wards that this was a very ‘trau mat iz-
ing exper i ence’ for him. Aft er seeing this 
video we are left  with a seri ously unpleas-
ant feeling. But why? 
 Aft er perform ances such as  Do you 
Mind? or aft er showing the video piece  Gaze 
or  Naked , people from the audi ence oft en 
show an urge to talk about their reac tions. 
Th ey describe how disturbed they become 
by their own reac tions and emotional 
responses while watch ing this. Th e most 
disturb ing thing, they say, is that they ﬁ nd 
them selves react ing more strongly watch ing 
the mech an ical panda on the oper a tion table 
(in  Naked ) then if it had been a real person. 
 It is at this very short moment between 
percep tion and the rational ‘correc tion’ 
that ‘the shock to thought’, which only art 
can give, happens. Only then the Animal-
Machine hypo thesis, as it is so deeply 
engraved in our think ing, is funda ment ally 
critiqued. Suddenly someone in the audi-
ence walks up to the artist and asks, ‘Why
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 Some images from  Naked and other install a tions.  IMAGES COPY RIGHT TOVE KJELLMARK.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TERRESTRIAL 
are the rabbits so sad?’ or ‘How did you get 
the elephants to group up and walk 
together in one direc tion?’ Th e answer is 
that the artist has done nothing special. 
Th ey are just moving in a very simple and 
auto mated pattern. 
 What does it say about us, Cartesians, 
when we react so strongly and emotion ally 
to these plastic shapes that so obvi ously 
move with the help of small servos and 
batter ies? What does this say about our 
mech an ical reac tions  and actions? And 
why do we, so easily, attrib ute ‘a life’ to a set 
of cogwheels? Rather than defend ing or 
critiquing the Animal-Machine hypo-
thesis, exper i ences like these play with our 
passions and most convin cingly realize the 
crisis (ecolo gical, digital, but then also 
capit al ist) that make up our every day lives 
today. Th ey enact these crises and their 
consequences best, compel ling us to 
rethink the same ques tion over and over 
again: ‘What happened . . .?’ 
 See also  Animal; Art; Occupy (aft er Deleuze); 
Postanimalism  
 Note  
 1.  Réponse de M. Descartes a M. Morus. 
1649.  Œuevres, tome x. p.  204. ‘Mais le 
plus grand de tous les préjugés que nous 
ayons retenus de notre enfance, est celui 
de croire que les bêtes pensent,’ etc. 
 Rick Dolphijn and Tove Kjellmark  
 TERRESTRIAL  
 As a noun, terrestrial makes its ﬁ rst appear-
ance in English in 1602, in Shakespeare’s 
comedy  Th e Merry Wives of Windsor . In 
the play, it refers to a mortal, a layman, a 
human being ( Oxford English Dictionary ) 
and it is coupled by way of oppos i tion to 
celes tial beings. In similar fashion, previ-
ous adjectival uses of the word, for example 
in Tyndale’s 1525 English trans la tion of 
the Bible, had intro duced terrestrial as a 
refer ence to the earthly sphere, again in 
oppos i tion to the celes tial sphere. Terres-
trial is – both as noun and adject ive – that 
which pertains to the earth and the soil, to 
mater ial instead of ether eal life. 
 Th ree planes present them selves to us in 
view of this term: terrestrial as tool to think 
human exist ence eman cip ated from a divine 
order; terrestrial as tied to earth in view of 
the imman ent realm of plan et ary exist ence; 
and terrestrial in the sf- mode as envi sion ing 
terran exist ences – as earthly crit ters, and 
thereby disrupt ing the struc tural vertic al ity 
of heaven and earth and the anthro po-
centric fantas ies of extra ter restri al ism. 
 First plane: terrestrial as tool to think 
human exist ence eman cip ated from a 
divine order. Derived from the Latin  terra 
(whose Greek precursor and equi val ent is 
 gaia ), the rising usage of terrestrial in the 
Renaissance – of which the stress of Dante’s 
 Divine Comedy (1305–21) on the pilgrim’s 
worldly journey is one early example – is 
not surpris ing. Th e earthly exist ence of 
the human animal was of growing concern 
to 
Renaissance 
human ism, 
reach ing 
from Dante, Erasmus and Bruno, via 
Shakespeare’s dramatic anatom ies of the 
human to Vico’s birth of the new sciences, 
whereby the internal, espe cially gendered 
and racial ized divi sions and exclu sions 
within the category of the ‘human’ were 
crucial to this ﬁ rst- wave human ist concep-
tion of ‘Man’ ( Wynter 2003 ; also  Bourke 
2011 ). As Erich Auerbach’s study  Dante als 
Dichter der irdis chen Welt (1929) argued – 
and Edward Said was to follow Auerbach in 
this ( Said 2003 ) – Dante was an early  Poet 
of the Secular World , as the English trans la-
tion renders the title of Auerbach’s study. 
Emily Apter has noted that this trans la tion 
is not entirely fortu nate (2006: 69), as it was
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
not so much the secular (as diﬀ er ent from, 
yet folded onto the divine) but more radic-
ally the earthly ( irdisch ) that Dante, 
Auerbach and Said were inter ested in. Said 
argues that Auerbach’s reading of Dante 
sugges ted that ‘for all of its invest ment in 
the eternal and immut able, the  Divine 
Comedy is even more success ful in repres-
ent ing reality as basic ally human’ in its 
‘earthly histor icity’ (2003: xxvi). In a similar 
fashion, Said, up until his  Humanism and 
Democratic Criticism (2004), is inves ted in 
think ing the ‘worldly’ as the fact that ‘all 
repres ent a tions were  in the world and 
subject to its numer ous hetero gen eous real-
it ies’ (2004: 49), speak ing also with his crit-
ical analyses of Orientalism and his life- 
long polit ical analysis of and commit ment 
to the Palestinian ques tion in mind. In view 
of Said’s (Auerbachian) stress on ‘world li-
ness’, Apter speaks then of Said’s ‘terrestrial 
human ism’ (2013: 226), a commit ment to 
the histor ical, power- bound arrange ment 
of reality. She suggests that his emphasis, 
through out his writ ings, on the ‘word 
“world” in its widest ascrip tions prompts 
renewed philo soph ical invest ig a tions of 
what is  irdisch , in the manner of late Kant, 
who advanced some wacky yet intriguing 
theor ies about the earth as a self- sanc tion-
ing  nomos’  (ibid.: 225). Such a ‘terrestrial’ or 
‘ irdisch human’ that Said aimed to imagine 
may be, Apter supposes, ‘some what other-
worldly, but it is a kind of other world li ness 
that discloses states of freedom, or heresy, 
or sublime justice’ (226). 
 Second plane: terrestrial as tied to earth 
in view of the imman ent realm of plan et ary 
exist ence. Although the term terres  trial rings 
with allu sions to the couple terrestrial/celes-
tial outlined above, its refer ence to the earthly 
has also begun to move it into yet other 
orbits. In her plea for plan et ar ity, Gayatri C. 
Spivak evokes the earth(ly) as a crucial ﬁ gure 
in order to imagine the world- wide span of 
contem por ary, histor ic ally indebted inter ac-
tions. In  Death of a Discipline , Spivak argues 
for a concep tual turn to the ‘plan et ary rather 
than contin ental, global or worldly’ (2003: 
72) in order to imagine present- day cohab it-
a tion and to ‘reverse and displace glob al iz a-
tion into plan et ar ity’ (ibid.: 97). According to 
Spivak, espe cially globe (but also world) 
permits abstrac tion, com pu ta tion and the 
‘impos i tion of the same system of exchange 
every where’ (72). In response to this she 
strives to unearth ﬁ gures for this cohab it a-
tion that permit think ing the ‘diﬀ er en ti ated 
polit ical space’ (72) of the south ern and 
north ern hemi spheres, ﬁ gures that allow us 
to reima gine alter ity and collect ive respons-
ib il it ies, rework histor ical strat i ﬁ c a tions of 
power and train our transna tional literacies. 
With recourse to Cuban activ ist intel lec tual 
José Martí, Spivak suggests that the earth 
(and espe cially the shape it takes in Martí’s 
invest ig a tions of the rural and the land), as a 
‘bigger concept- meta phor than bounded 
nations, located cities’ (93), might oﬀ er a 
‘parana tional image that can substi tute for 
inter na tional’ (95) in order to spec u late and 
imagine plan et ar ity. In its allu sions to the 
earthly and to the celes tial body earth, 
terrestrial – although not directly used by 
Spivak – speaks of this need to reima gine 
collect ive 
cohab it a tion 
and 
plan et ary 
respons ib il it ies. 
 Th ird plane: terrestrial in the sf- mode as 
envi sion ing terran exist ences and/as earthly 
crit ters. Th is third plane gives another spin 
to the divide; it trans forms the very vertic al-
ity of heaven and earth. Th e hier archy 
between heaven and earth always already 
limits the scope of terres tri al ity before we 
even begin to think it, by setting terrestrial in 
oppos i tion to a possible escape into the 
extra- terrestrial ( Haraway [1992] 2004a , 
 [1992] 2004b ,  1997 ). Feminist science 
studies contexts put into ques tion this hier-
arch ic ally struc tur ing frame work as a neces-
sary guide for crit ical inquir ies. To think 
with Haraway in the sf- mode – and sf stands
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TOLERANCES AND DURATION 
for ‘science ﬁ ction, string ﬁ gures, spec u lat ive 
fabu la tion, science fact, spec u lat ive femin ist 
and so far’ ( Haraway 2012a ) – enables 
terrestri al ity to become a kennel of thought 
itself for, as Haraway speciﬁ es, ‘the history of 
compan ion species, a very mundane and on- 
going sort of tale, one full of misun der stand-
ings, achieve ment, crimes, and renew able 
hopes’ ( Haraway 2003 : 5). Th e radical 
emphasis on earthly matters, attend ing to 
the always unﬁ n ished busi ness of meaning- 
matter ing processes making up terra, high-
lights the urgency to work towards account-
ab il ity in and for the violent, asym met ric ally 
bound rela tions ‘we’ ﬁ nd each other in – as 
terran beings, and there fore entangled in 
human and non- human rela tions ( Braidotti 
2013 ;  Wynter and McKittrick 2015 ). Yet it 
also stresses that this endeav our does not 
only allow for that which ‘is’ – that which is 
known in the mater ial- semi otic hege-
mon ies or that which ‘we’ are convinced to 
see in front of us, i.e. that which we usually 
call ‘reality’. Inquiring in the sf- mode as 
terran terrestri als asks for a curi os ity that 
‘gets one into thick mud’ to envi sion ‘autre- 
mondi al isa tions’ ( Haraway 2008 : 38). Other 
truths to be told, other stories to be heard, 
and other world ings to come about is an 
‘other worldly’ endeav our, yet one that is 
not in need of an ‘outer space’ or any ‘other 
world’ – the old fantasy of the space race in 
its colo nial, phal logo- and anthro po centric 
imagin a tion. Rather, it is a becom ing- with-
other(s) and/as aﬃ  rm a tion of terran condi-
tions so that the task ‘to believe in this world’ 
(Deleuze and Guattari 1994: 75) returns 
non- apolo getic and yet open to the yet-
 to-come. 
 See also Capitalocene and Chthulucene; 
Cosmopolitics; Kin; Earth; Mattering; 
Planetary. 
 Birgit M. Kaiser and 
Kathrin Th iele 
 TOLERANCES AND DURATION  
 In engin eer ing terms toler ance refers to 
the permiss ible vari ations within a 
machine’s perform ance, mater ial prop er-
ties and meas ured values. In collo quial use 
it describes the limit at which some thing 
will cease to func tion as expec ted, or the 
personal char ac ter ist ics of a subdued 
stoicism. Oft en liberal, and poten tially 
femin ized, to be ‘toler ant’ is to be graciously 
recept ive but not neces sar ily gener ous. 
Th e inter sec tion of the mech an ical and 
personal mean ings of toler ance echoes its 
polit ical implic a tion, and its bearing on 
the posthu man. European nation- states 
pride them selves on their toler ance of the 
diﬀ er ences they permit within their territ-
ory. Th e idea of neut ral ity and accept ance 
is a found a tional European myth and has 
repeatedly given permis sion to expan sion, 
colo ni al ism and exclu sion ism. Tolerance 
is a supposedly stable space but it has a 
fragile bound ary, which if pres sured too 
force fully may shatter. Tolerance is then 
a calcul able precious ness rather than a 
bound less resource: compared to the 
inter i or ity of toler ance, dura tion is 
romantic ally expans ive. Duration and 
durab il ity are notori ously hard to repres-
ent because in the promise of endur ance is 
an impli cit appeal for change: where the 
persist ence of change is a descrip tion of 
process. To toler ate is not to endure and so 
it is in this temporal expanse of dura tion 
that we could say aesthetic descrip tion 
opens to the capa city to artic u late the 
space, continu ity even, between the 
emotional and the mech anic. It’s in this 
space that it is possible to make sens ible 
the tempor al it ies of a polit ics of endur-
ance and so the viol ence of condi tions of 
toler ance. 
 Harry Sanderson’s research- led artwork 
 Solid State (2014–ongoing) occu pies this 
space. Th e caustic light sculp tures freeze
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
an entan gle ment of labour rela tions, 
matter, 
tech no cratic 
aesthet ics, 
the 
tempor al it ies of visib il ity, and dura tions of 
light and produc tion in sculp tural objects. 
Th e sculp tures are icy, crys tal line and 
beau ti ful. Almost invis ibly incor por ated 
into the trans par ent plastic slab is a subtly 
contoured, contin gent surface that refracts 
the light passing through them. Th e 
process that guided the milling machines 
that shaped them is not commer cially 
avail able; 1 Sanderson’s algorithms compute 
the 
rela tion ship 
between 
the 
focal 
distances and the laws of light refrac tion, 
so that under speciﬁ c condi tions light 
bends through it and an image is cast out, 
as if from nowhere. Th ese are photo- 
graphic repres ent a tions in as much as they 
are literal draw ings with light. In a tradi-
tional under stand ing of photo graphic 
prac tice the formal aspects of the image 
become its currency and its meaning. In 
the caustics works the imper man ence of 
the image and the fore groun ded tech nique 
under mines notions of the pictorial and 
of repres ent a tion. If the image they enable 
is anything, it is a continu ous, circu lar 
descrip tion between the engin eered plastic 
object, the compu ta tional metrics ediﬁ ed 
by its form, and the ﬂ eet ing chiaroscuro it 
draws into its from and then refracts on in 
light and shadow. Its toler ances are set by
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TOLERANCES AND DURATION 
condi tion of a visib il ity, the polit ics of 
trans par ency belong to a longer history 
of systems of know ledge produc tion. Th e 
inven tion of photo graphy is concur rent 
with and tied to European colo nial expan-
sion. Th e French state awarded Louis-
Jacques-Mandé Daguerre the patent for 
the ﬁ rst ﬁ xed chem ical process in the same 
decade that France began its conquest in 
Algeria. Colonial expan sion depends on 
a perspectival logic that allows for the 
geomet ric organ iz a tion of space from 
projec tion. We believe the more we see, the 
 Solid State, Rain . 2016. CNC Milled Acrylic, Torch, Steel Wire & Fittings. 56.5 × 40 × 3 cm, at 
Gallery Levy|Delval.   PHOTOGRAPHER: ISABELLE ARTHUIS.  
the dura tion of time spent with them, and 
the visib il ity it might conjure. 
 Th ey are tricksy objects. Without prior 
know ledge of the engin eer ing and optical 
physics involved the image seems to be 
conjured by magic. Magic is a process 
that obscures its own work ings and in 
Sanderson’s 
sculp tures 
the 
tech nical 
process is obfus cated by their super ﬁ  cial 
trans par ency. Th is is the magic of tech no-
logy, but also the viol ence of the light. 
While the caustics machines are the for-
ma tion and objec ti ﬁ c a tion of a speciﬁ c
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
more we know, the more we can act. Th is is 
the Albertian perspect ive system that runs 
through all forms of Modern Western 
repres ent a tion and links Renaissance 
paint ing to carto graphy and the camera 
obscura, but it is a chain of logic which is 
under pres sure in Sanderson’s work. 
 Th e unnoticed contours of the surface 
of Sanderson’s sculp tures sedi ment a 
know ledge that is tacit and tactile, and this 
binding of the dual meaning of ‘caustic’ 
activ ates feel ings inside of tech no logy. In 
the language of physics ‘caustics’ refers to 
the spread of rays of light produced by a 
curved surface. More gener ally ‘caustic’ 
refers to a sharp or burning feeling, a felt 
consequence and the embod ied docu-
ment a tion of sensa tion. Th e projec tions are 
soft  images of small gestures that do not 
belong to the graphic language we asso ci-
ate with advanced vision tech no lo gies, and 
so they make systems of visib il ity more 
expli citly an issue of human inhab it a tion 
and polit ics. Where the  CNC milling 
machine followed a pattern written by a 
process of dura tional comput ing, and as 
light goes on to follow this surface as the 
mode of produc tion, the projec tion that is 
refrac ted is an image whose dura tion 
encom passes the tech niques, ideo lo gies, 
bodies, epistemic expect a tions and labours 
entangled in it. 
 Th e caustic objects are not ghosts, but 
present ﬁ gures in our ﬂ eshy lives – active 
matter in the exten sion of the real through 
the tech niques of the image. Th e drive to 
re- describe and recon struct the visible- 
temporal ﬁ eld is a polit ical desire that runs 
on a libid inal currency; it is the emotional 
in the tech no lo gical. Sanderson’s work is 
hugely desir ing but it comes up against the 
condi tions of its own produc tion and in 
that confront a tion of neces sity and 
ambi tion the barri ers of imagin a tion, its 
toler ances, are made tangible. It is in this 
image–object–dura tion continuum that 
the caustics- objects embod ies the limits of 
the visible and in doing so proves its edges 
to be intol er able. 
 In the frame of the posthu man the 
caustics works move beyond repres ent a-
tion into a process of descrip tion. Th ey 
0.1
0.05
-0.05
-0.15
-0.1
-0.1
0.1
-0.05
0.05
 Detail graph plot showing surface contours for  Solid State, 
Rain , 2016.  IMAGES: HARRY SANDERSON,  SOLID STATE  (2014–ONGOING). 
TEXT: ALEXANDRA SYMONS SUTCLIFFE.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TRANS* 
gender and sex. Such a concep tu al iz a tion, 
stem ming from the ﬁ eld of trans gender 
studies, consti tutes a certain kind of trans-
pos i tional and trans versal meth od o logy, a 
way of seeing and knowing that inter sects 
with other human it ies, social and natural 
sciences’ discip lines and asks how (trans)
gender ing is related to processes of racial-
iz a tion, dehu man iz a tion, speci ation and 
anim al iz a tion ( Stryker and Currah 2015 ). 
It repres ents ‘matter ing’s vital capa city to 
become more and other than it already is 
through move ments, connec tions, intens i-
ﬁ c a tions, and reﬁ g ur a tions that traverse 
exist ing mater ial arrange ments’ (ibid.: 
190). Th e trans it ive, preﬁ xial, prepos i tional 
nature of  trans-  and  trans* proposes to see 
trans ness/trans ing as a process, a ‘becom-
ing with’ ( Haraway 2008 ) that stretches 
across species ( Chen 2012 ), ecolo gies ( Kier 
2010 ), and matter itself ( Colebrook 2015 ), 
and allows for trans gender studies to move 
beyond trans gender only as an iden tity 
category and towards trans gender as a 
mode of analysis – or, as Regina Kunzel 
calls it, ‘transop tics’ (2014). 
 Even though the academic writing – 
mostly coming from the ﬁ eld of medical 
sciences and psycho logy – on ‘trans gender 
phenom ena’ has been around for a long 
time, the 1990s marked the advent of the 
ﬁ eld of ‘trans gender studies’ and ‘trans-
gender theory’ ( Stryker and Aizura 2013 ). 
Th is emer ging body of thought pointed 
out that trans gender is inex tric ably linked 
to ques tions of who gets to count as 
human. As Stryker and Currah note, ‘to be 
human has meant taking a posi tion in rela-
tion to sexual diﬀ er ence and becom ing 
gendered 
. . . 
while 
to 
be 
forcibly 
ungendered or to become trans gendered 
renders one’s human ness precari ous’ (2015: 
189). Transgender there fore chal lenges the 
human ist stand ard of legib il ity and intel li-
gib il ity and allows for explor a tion of how 
the category of the human works as a 
make mani fest a version of histor ical and 
dura tional perspect ive that exceeds our 
current ideo lo gical limits. It is a compos i-
tion that is not asked to toler ate the 
opening up of the frame of repres ent a tion; 
but one that is, like the projec tions spring-
ing from both the objects them selves and 
the very labour and abstrac tions that 
computed and fabric ated them, gener at-
ive.  In the complex rela tion ship between 
manu fac tured toler ances and dura tion the 
need to construct new methods of looking 
and knowing becomes acutely appar ent: 
and the mater ial consequences of that 
undeni able. 
 See 
also 
Algorithmic 
Studies; 
Computational Turn; Process Ontologies; 
Violence. 
 Note  
 1. Th e algorithms guiding these processes 
were developed by Sanderson with Eric 
Verner and Vipul Lugade at Matlab 
Geeks ( http://matlabgeeks.com/ ), based 
on the papers Schwartzbkurg et  al., 
‘High Contrast Caustics’,  EPFL (École 
Polytechnique Féderale de Lausanne), 
2014, and Yue et  al., ‘Poisson-Based 
Continuous Surface Generation for 
Goal-Based Caustics’,’  ACM Transactions 
on Graphics  , 33(3), May 2014; and use 
‘Ceres solver’ by Google and the 
algorithm ‘Optimal Transportation’ by 
Quentin Merigot, Ceremade, Université 
Paris-Dauphine. 
 Harry Sanderson and 
Alexandra Symons Sutcliﬀ e 
 TRANS*  
 In the most general sense,  trans* denotes a 
move ment across, above and beyond, with 
partic u lar refer ence to (yet not limited to)
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
TRANS*
norm at ive tool ( Hayward and Weinstein 
2015 ) in deﬁ n ing what counts as animal, 
non- human, monstrous, etc. 
 Trans embod i ment has a long history of 
being seen as monstrous and in that sense 
not- quite-human, not least because of 
intric ate connec tions – both mater ial and 
discurs ive – with the medical and phar ma-
ceut ical industry. In her polem ical book 
 Th e Transsexual Empire: Th e Making of the 
She-Male (1979), Janice Raymond claims 
that trans sexu als are essen tially raping 
women’s bodies by redu cing them to 
arti ﬁ  cial construc tions, with the notion 
of ‘empire’ here stand ing in for science, 
tech no logy and medical discourses and 
prac tices. In response, Sandy Stone, taking 
up her mentor Donna Haraway’s notion 
of the cyborg and the kind of polit ics of 
resist ance that it proposes, argues that 
while indeed the medic al iz a tion of trans 
oft en leads to rein stat ing sexist binar ies, 
the only solu tion is not to look for some 
authen tic truth beyond medical discourse 
but to construct one’s own posi tion  as 
trans sexu als ( Stone 1991 ). Stone there fore 
proposes that there is a need for trans-
sexu als to come out as trans sexu als and 
in this way create space for their own 
discourses. 
 Similarly, Susan Stryker discusses the 
meta phor of Frankenstein in rela tion to 
trans sexu als as monstrous ‘man- made’ 
binary viol at ors. In her germinal text ‘My 
Words to Victor Frankenstein Above the 
Village of Chamounix’ (1994) she claims 
that the trans gender body, like that of 
Frankenstein’s monster, is seen as an arti ﬁ -
cial exper i ment, thus excluded from 
human communit ies. However, she also 
resists the dialect ical move of natur al iz a-
tion by embra cing her own monstrous 
iden tity and acknow ledging her ‘egal it-
arian 
rela tion ship 
with 
non- human 
mater ial Being’ (ibid.:240). Later on Stryker 
and her colleagues at Macquire University 
coined the term  soma t ech nics ( Stryker and 
Pugliese 2009 ) to under score the inex tric-
ab il ity of ‘the body (as a cultur ally intel li-
gible construct) and the tech niques 
( dispos i tifs and hard tech no lo gies) in and 
through which corpor eal it ies are formed 
and trans formed’ ( Sullivan 2014 : 188). 
Michelle O’Brien ( [2003] 2013 ) also points 
to entan gle ments between matter, tech no-
logy and biopol it ics by arguing that trans 
bodies are always already enmeshed within 
the ﬂ ows of biomed ical capit al ism, colo-
nial histor ies and ‘immun owars’ through 
their access to and use of hormonal phar-
ma ceut ic als. Th e latter also points to a 
cybor gian polit ical strategy for account ing 
for one’s complex posi tion and at the same 
time ﬁ nding modes of resist ance (in her 
own words: ‘my survival depends on inter-
fa cing global capit al ism, but inter fa cing it 
improp erly’ –  O’Brien [2003] 2013 : 63). 
 Th e inter sec tions of capit al ism, bio-
pol it ics and trans is also taken up in the 
work of Paul Preciado. In his book  Testo 
Junkie: Sex, Drugs and Biopolitics in the 
Pharmacopornographic Era he analyses 
how the phar ma co por no graphic regime – 
the process of a ‘biomolecu lar (phar maco) 
and semi otic- tech nical (porno graphic) 
govern ment of sexual subjectiv ity’ (2013: 
34) – produces contem por ary forms of 
sexual embod i ment. Preciado proposes 
that for a move ment and polit ics of 
contem por ary trans- femin ism it is crucial 
to recog nize that ‘your body, the body of 
the multi tude and the phar ma co por no-
graphic networks that consti tute them are 
polit ical labor at or ies, both eﬀ ects of the 
processes of subjectiv a tion and control 
and poten tial spaces for polit ical agency 
and crit ical resist ance to normal iz a tion’ 
(ibid.: 348). Th e crit ical inter sec tions 
between trans embod i ment and milit ary 
and surveil lance tech no lo gies are also 
taken up in the work of Dean Spade ( 2011 ), 
Toby Beauchamp ( 2009 ,  2014 ) and
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TRANS- CORPOR EAL ITY 
Christine Quinan ( 2016 ). Th e work on 
these inter sec tions high lights that surveil-
lance is not only built into the very category 
of trans gender through the medical 
discourse and close medical monit or ing 
that trans gender bodies undergo, but also 
aﬀ ects 
trans gender 
subjects 
through 
policies such as new secur ity meas ure-
ments at airports adopted as part of the 
‘war on terror’. 
 Another emer ging ﬁ eld within trans 
studies is what can be called ‘tran im al it ies’ 
( Kelley 2014 ) or ‘tran imacies’ ( Chen 2012 ). 
Th e category of the human depends 
strongly on the animal as its other in a 
binary mode of diﬀ er ence that places 
human/man/culture in a super ior posi tion 
over animal/woman/nature. In a similar 
vein, espe cially in popular media discourses 
around trans rights and life, trans gender 
has oft en been rejec ted as ‘unnat ural’, 
belong ing to neither of the binary categor-
ies, yet travers ing both. Th is posi tion has 
been chal lenged, for instance, by Myra J. 
Hird in her article on ‘Animal Transex’, 
which shows that trans is not a ‘distinctly 
human enter prise’ (2006: 39) and should 
not be considered as an entirely socio- 
cultural phenomenon. Bringing together 
new mater i al ism and trans schol ar ship 
Hird demon strates that trans exists in non- 
human species, and proposes that trans 
phenom ena, if explored in a way that is not 
restric ted to cultural explan a tions, chal-
lenge the nature/culture distinc tion itself. 1   
 Th e 
explor a tions 
of 
cross- overs 
between animal and trans studies as well 
as new mater i al ism high light the calls for 
‘trans ing the posthu man’ ( Nurka 2015 ), 
too. Trans*/Trans- here comes to repres ent 
a line of ﬂ ight or a move ment of becom ing 
( Stryker, Currah and Moore 2008 ). It opens 
a space for trans gender studies to engage 
with a broader set of theor et ical ques tions, 
and for posthu man theory to consider the 
kind of capa cit ies, rela tion al it ies and crit-
ical poten tials engendered in trans-/trans* 
theory and embod i ment. 
 See also Animacies; Makehuman; Pill, the; 
Post human Sexuality; Placenta Politics; 
Xenofeminism. 
 Note 
 1. 
Apart from signi ﬁ c ant work already 
produced on trans and mater i al ism (such 
as  Chen 2012 ;  Hayward and Weinstein 
2015 ,  Hayward 2010 ;  Irni 2013b ;  Simpkins 
2016 ), currently a special issue of  Graduate 
Journal of Social Science is also being put 
together on ‘Trans mater i al it ies’, address-
ing speciﬁ c ally the inter sec tions between 
new mater i al ism and trans studies (editors 
Max van Midde, Olga Cielemęcka and 
Vick Virtú, forth com ing July 2017).  
 Goda Klumbytė 
 TRANS- CORPOR EAL ITY  
 Trans- corpor eal ity is a posthu man ist mode 
of new mater i al ism and mater ial femin ism. 
Trans- corpor eal ity means that all creatures, 
as embod ied beings, are inter meshed 
with the dynamic, mater ial world, which 
crosses through them, trans forms them, 
and is trans formed by them. While trans- 
corpor eal ity as an onto logy does not 
exclude any living creature, it does begin 
with the human, in order – para dox ic ally 
perhaps – to disrupt Western human excep-
tion al ism. Th e ﬁ gure/ground rela tion 
between the human and the envir on ment 
dissolves as the outline of the human is 
traversed by substan tial mater ial inter-
changes. Mapping those inter changes 
across all species and at all scales is the 
prelude to trans- corpor eal ethics and polit-
ics. Trans- corpor eal ity contests the master 
subject of Western human ist indi vidu al ism, 
who imagines himself as tran scend ent,
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
TRANS- CORPOR EAL ITY
disem bod ied and removed from the world 
he surveys. Th e trans- corpor eal subject is 
gener ated through and entangled with 
biolo gical, tech no lo gical, economic, social, 
polit ical and other systems, processes and 
events, at vastly diﬀ er ent scales. Trans- 
corpor eal ity ﬁ nds itself within capit al ism, 
but resists the allure of shiny objects, 
consid er ing instead the eﬀ ects they have, 
from manu fac ture to disposal, while reck-
on ing with the strange agen cies that inter-
con nect substance, ﬂ esh and place. It does 
not contem plate discrete objects from a 
safe distance, but instead, thinks  as the very 
stuﬀ  of the ever- emer gent world ( Alaimo 
2016 ). 
 Th inking as the stuﬀ  of the world has a 
long femin ist history, due to the way women, 
along with racially marked and disabled 
peoples, have grappled with being subjects 
oft en categor ized and system at ic ally treated 
as objects. Trans- corpor eal ity, along with 
other theor et ical concepts within femin ist 
posthu man it ies, suggests a new ﬁ gur a tion 
of the human aft er the Human, which is not 
founded on detach ment, dual isms, hier-
arch ies or excep tion al ism, and which does 
not, in Val Plumwood’s terms, ‘back ground’ 
nature (1993). Like Rosi Bradotti’s trans-
versal subject outlined in  Th e Posthuman 
and other works, the ‘trans’ of transcor-
por eal ity insists on multiple hori zontal 
cross ings, trans its and trans form a tions. 
As Braidotti contends, ‘Th e chal lenge for 
crit ical theory is moment ous: we need to 
visu al ize the subject as a trans versal entity 
encom passing the human, our genetic 
neigh bours the animals and the earth as a 
whole’ (2013: 82). 
 I developed the concept of trans- 
corpor eal ity while editing the collec tion 
 Material Feminisms (2008) with Susan J. 
Hekman and while writing  Bodily Natures: 
Science, Environment, and the Material Self 
(2010). In an earlier essay about archi tec-
ture and envir on mental ethics, I had drawn 
upon femin ist theor ies of corpor eal ity, 
includ ing the ‘inter cor por eal ity’ of Gail 
Weiss, which, she
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TRANS- CORPOR EAL ITY 
 Trans- corpor eal ity is not a mystical, 
spir itual, phenomen o lo gical or exper i en tial 
sense that ‘everything is connec ted’; it 
requires a radical rethink ing of onto lo gies 
and epistem o lo gies; it involves science, 
science studies, citizen science, femin ist 
theory, envir on mental theor ies, crit ical race 
studies, disab il ity studies, liter at ure, art and 
every day activ ism. Th inking the subject as a 
mater ial being, subject to the agen cies of the 
comprom ised, entangled world, enacts an 
envir on mental posthu man ism. Th e subject 
cannot be separ ated from networks of 
intra- active mater ial agen cies ( Barad 2007 ) 
and thus cannot ignore the disturb ing 
epistem o lo gical quandar ies of risk society 
( Beck 1992 ). Trans- corpor eal ity, as it 
reckons with mater ial agen cies that traverse 
substances, objects, bodies and envir on-
ments, entails reck on ing with scientiﬁ c 
captures, even as the data is always already 
‘mangled’ ( Pickering 1995 ) by social and 
economic forces. Scientiﬁ c inform a tion, 
produced by experts or ‘ordin ary experts’, is 
neces sary for trans- corpor eal mappings, 
which circu late through popular culture, 
politi cized communit ies and subcul tures, 
such as that of people with multiple chem-
ical sens it iv ity ( Alaimo 2010 ). 
 Trans- corpor eal ity discour ages fantas ies 
of tran scend ence and imper vi ous ness that 
render envir on ment al ism merely an elect-
ive and external enter prise. Even though 
trans- corpor eal ity emerged from envir on-
mental health and envir on mental justice 
move ments, which focus on (post)humans, 
the concept extends toward all species who 
ﬁ nd them selves at the cross roads of body 
and place. Th e posthu man ethics of trans- 
corpor eal ity insists that even the most 
routine human activ it ies, such as purchas-
ing plastics, impact human and non- human 
lives across vast geographic and temporal 
scales, extend ing even to the bottom of the 
sea ( Alaimo 2016 ). Th e bizarre enorm ity of 
the eﬀ ects of the most minute every day 
actions under scores the urgent need for 
rethink ing ethics and polit ics in the 
Anthropocene, an epoch in which human 
activ it ies have profoundly altered the planet. 
Cecilia Åsberg, Redi Koobak and Ericka 
Johnson contend that ‘Posthumanities as 
femin ist analyt ical prac tices work for us to 
re- tool the human it ies so as to meet up with 
the on- going trans form a tions of our worlds’ 
(2001: 228). Trans- corpor eal ity grapples 
with precisely how the trans form a tion of 
the world alters – or should alter – onto lo-
gies, epistem o lo gies, polit ics and ethics. 
While trans- corpor eal ity was not conceived 
under the sign of the Anthropocene, it 
nonethe less epitom izes the sort of posthu-
man ist onto lo gies in which there can be no 
‘nature’ outside the human. And yet the 
human is hardly the master of his domain 
but instead a site traversed by strange agen-
cies and immersed within entangled ethical 
and polit ical rela tions. While toxic chem ic-
als, radi ation, toxic e- waste from the global 
north dumped in the global south, indus-
trial agri cul ture, factory farming and animal 
exper i ment a tion are oft en over looked in 
predom in ant visual, theor et ical and popular 
accounts of the proposed anthro po genic 
geolo gical epoch, trans- corpor eal ity, with 
its atten tion to the discon cert ingly extens-
ive eﬀ ects of seem ingly benign consumer ist 
prac tices, under scores that they too are 
matters of concern for the Anthropocene. 
 Since trans- corpor eal ity involves unex-
pec ted trans its and cross ings, it may be 
ﬁ tting to conclude with a brief account of 
how trans- corpor eal ity has been taken up in 
diver gent and perhaps surpris ing ways. 
Christina Fredengren, in ‘Posthumanism, 
the Transcorporeal and Biomolecular 
Archaeology’, employs the concept in order 
to place archae olo gical data such as  DNA 
and isotope analysis ‘in a theor et ical frame’ 
that 
demon strates 
‘the 
entan gle ment 
between the skel eton, the visceral parts of 
the body and the envir on ment’ (2013: 59).
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
TRANSHUMANISM/POSTHUMANISM
Dayna Nadine Scott, a legal scholar, argues 
that ‘the theory of transcor por eal ity directs 
us not only towards the permeab il ity of 
the bodily bound ary but also towards the 
science/exper i ence bound ary;’ thus a ‘nego-
ti ated empir i cism, atten u ated by transcor-
por eal ity . . . puts forward the possib il ity that 
exper i en tial know ledge is robust because of 
its inter sub jectiv ity, not in spite of it’ (2015: 
19, 20). Magdalena Górska takes tran scor-
por eal ity as a ‘key analyt ical appar atus’ of 
her disser ta tion,  Breathing Matters , demon-
strat ing 
how 
breath ing 
‘mater i al izes 
human embod ied subjectiv it ies as always- 
already dispersed’ as she argues for recal ib-
rat ing ‘femin ist analyt ical tools as onto- 
epistem o lo gical’ (forth com ing, n.p.). In the 
collec tion edited by Jeﬀ rey Jerome Cohen, 
 Prismatic Ecology: Ecology Beyond Green , 
Robert McRuer critiques how ‘pink wash ing’ 
obscures queer trans- corpor eal rela tions; 
Steve Mentz paints trans- corpor eal ity 
brown because it suggests ‘separ a tion itself 
may be prob lem atic’ within the ‘brown 
inter change of life and nonlife;’ and Cohen 
reﬂ ects on the grey ness of zombies, assert-
ing that ‘[m]onster, human, and world are 
transcor por eal’ ( Cohen 2013a : 70, 207, 285). 
Tema Milstein and Charlotte Kroløkke 
analyse the ‘climactic moment of encoun ter-
ing the embod ied other’ such as that of the 
‘orca gasms’ of whale watch ers, which they 
argue are ‘inter sub ject ive and transcor por-
eal events’ (2012: 88). Mel Y. Chen inter prets 
transcor por eal ity as ‘aﬃ  rm ing the agen cies 
of the matter that we live among’, such that 
‘the sentience of the couch, in our meeting 
and commun ing, then becomes my own 
sentience as well’ (2012: 182). Astrida 
Neimanis and Rachel Lowen Walker in 
‘Weathering: Climate Change and the 
“Th ick Time” of Transcorporeality’, make 
the temporal, rather than spatial, dimen-
sions of transcor por eal ity ‘more expli cit:’: 
‘Th e claim that . . . transcor por eal tempor al-
ity belies a phenomen o logy of weath er ing, 
means that the spatial meta phors we have 
histor ic ally used to frame our bodies are 
unable to fully account for the co- creat ive 
rela tion ship between bodies, whether bodies 
of climate, water, soil, or bones’ (2014: 566, 
570). 
 Jeﬀ rey Jerome Cohen in  Stone: An 
Ecology of the Inhuman , also expands the 
tempor al ity of transcor por eal ity in order 
to bring the concept further along ‘its 
disan thro po centric path’. Extending trans-
cor por eal ity to a ‘geophilic Long Ecology’, 
Cohen writes: ‘stone’s intim ate alter ity 
demands acknow ledge ment of more- than-
human temporal and spatial entan gle ment, 
so that ecology becomes Long Ecology, 
an aﬀ ect ively fraught web of rela tion that 
unfolds within an extens ive spatial and 
temporal range, demand ing an ethics of 
rela tion and scale’ (2015b: 41). With this 
Long Ecology, and other matters, trans- 
corpor eal ity has, rather appro pri ately, 
developed beyond its origins. 
 See also Anthropocene; Bodies Politic; 
Body Without Organs; Feminist Post-
h umanities; Neo/New Materialism; Post-
human Ethics; Non-Human Agency. 
 Stacy Alaimo 
 TRANSHUMANISM/
POSTHUMANISM  
 Posthumanism and transhuman ism are 
two move ments which are oft en confused 
with each other. Th e reason is that both 
are contem por ary philo sophies sharing a 
crit ical approach to the human, which, 
far from a ﬁ xed notion, is perceived as a 
dynamic and evolving frame; both arose as 
social and philo soph ical waves in the late 
1980s and early 1990s, but the drives 
motiv at ing them are rooted in diﬀ er ent 
tradi tions of thoughts and they should
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
TRANSHUMANISM/POSTHUMANISM 
not be assim il ated. Furthermore, posthu-
man ism and transhuman ism contem plate 
distinct currents within them selves, such 
as Critical, Cultural and Philosophical 
Posthumanism and New Materialism, in 
the case of Posthumanism; and Liber tarian 
Transhumanism, Democratic Transhu-
manism, Extropianism and Singularitari-
anism, in the case of Transhumanism. In 
this entry, the terms Posthumanism and 
Transhumanism will refer to aspects indis-
tinctly char ac ter iz ing their inner currents; 
they will be summar ized in such a way as 
to account for their speciﬁ cit ies in the 
larger umbrella frame of the posthu man 
( Ferrando 2014 ). 
 In an exten ded sense, posthu man ism 
can be presen ted as a post- human ism, a 
post- anthro po centrism ( Braidotti 2013 ) 
and a post- dualism. Born out of post mod-
ern ism, it further devel ops the decon struc-
tion of the human started in the 1960s and 
1970s, under lin ing the fact that, histor ic ally, 
not every human being has been recog-
nized as such: some humans have been 
considered more human than others; some 
have been considered less than human. 
Posthumanism, as a post- human ism, does 
not employ any hier arch ical schemata in 
address ing the human frame. Th e inter sec-
tional crit ical lenses of gender, race, class, 
sexual orient a tion, ability and age, among 
others, have success fully demon strated that 
the human is not one but many, and it shall 
thus be accoun ted in plural ways, based on 
the exper i ence of embod ied human beings. 
To this frame, posthu man ism adds the 
critique of species ism and can be thus seen 
as a post- anthro po centrism, high light ing 
and decon struct ing the epistem o lo gical 
and onto lo gical legacies of the Great Chain 
of Being, accord ing to which the human 
has been granted a special posi tion in the 
Western hier arch ical struc ture repres ent-
ing divine creation ( Lovejoy 1936 ). More in 
general, posthu man ism acknow ledges the 
fact that the notion of the human has 
been mostly deﬁ ned in separ a tion from the 
non- human realm. Posthumanism, instead, 
does not grant the human any onto- 
epistem o lo gical primacy, address ing the 
human in inter con nec ted and symbi otic 
rela tions to the non- human ( Haraway 2008 ; 
 Wolfe 2010 ). In this sense, posthu man ism 
is a post- dualism, stress ing the hybrid and 
rela tional terms of exist ence ( Barad 2007 ). 
 Th e drive to reach post- human ist, post- 
anthro po centric and post- dual istic onto- 
epistem o lo gies does not char ac ter ize the 
transhuman approach. Transhumanism 
traces its roots within the Enlighten -
ment  and does not reject the human-
istic tradi tion ( More 2013 ); on the contrary, 
transhuman ism focuses speciﬁ c ally on 
human enhance ment, which explains its 
symbol ‘H+’ as an acronym for ‘Humanity 
Plus’. Th e main keys to access such a goal 
are iden ti ﬁ ed in science and tech no logy, in 
their exist ing, emer ging and spec u lat ive 
frames. In the progress ive timeline of the 
transhuman, the future bears unique 
poten tials: some humans may tran scend 
their actual outﬁ t in such radical ways as to 
become posthu man ( Bostrom 2005a ). Th is 
is another reason causing the theor et ical 
confu sion between posthu man ism and 
transhuman ism. In fact, within the 
transhuman liter at ure, the term ‘posthu-
man’ refers to a stage which might evolve 
aft er the current transhuman era. On the 
other side, accord ing to posthu man ism, 
the posthu man can be seen as a paradigm 
shift  which is already occur ring by 
approach ing and perform ing the human in 
post- human ist, post- anthro po centric and 
post- dual istic ways. 
 See also Critical Posthumanism; Critical 
Posthuman Th eory; Posthumanist Perform-
 antivity; Object-Oriented Ontology. 
 Francesca Ferrando
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
(UN)DOCUMENTED CITIZENSHIP
a global univer sally inter re lated civil iz a-
tion may produce barbar i ans from its own 
midst by forcing millions of people into 
condi tions which, despite all appear ances, 
are the condi tions of savages’ (ibid.: 302). 
 Th is analysis is radic al ized by Giorgio 
Agamben in his famous  Homo Sacer . For 
Agamben, the notion of human rights 
signals the infringe ment of polit ical life 
over biolo gical life: ‘declar a tions of rights 
repres ent the origin ary ﬁ gure of the 
inscrip tion of natural life in the juridico- 
polit ical order of the nation- state’ (1998: 
75). For Agamben, human rights serve as a 
hall mark of the power over bare life. 
Agamben’s analysis seems to end in a pess-
im istic predic tion for the future: the ﬁ gure 
of the refugee is an ‘onto lo gical destiny’; 
Agamben’s famous conclu sion, that we are 
all in the camps, aims to show how under-
neath juridico- polit ical iden ti ﬁ c a tions we 
are all at the mercy of naked power over 
bare life. Th e triumph of juridico- polit ical 
power over life is complete. 
 Th ese concep tu al iz a tions proved to be a 
pres ci ent criti cism of the global viol ence to 
be unleashed on refugees. Indeed, now that 
the borders of Europe can be seen as sites 
where necro pol it ics are becom ing ever 
more appar ent ( Mbembe 2003 ), and while 
in the interior of European nation- states 
who unan im ously subscribe to the declar-
a tion of human rights the treat ment of 
undoc u mented refugees is frequently in 
direct 
viol a tion 
of 
human 
rights 
( Spijkerboer 2013 ), pess im ism is justi ﬁ ed. 
Yet, as the twenty- ﬁ rst century progresses, 
 (UN)DOCUMENTED CITIZENSHIP  
 One of the unavoid able ques tions that are 
raised by contem por ary refugee crises, 
deaths at the borders of Europe and 
perman ent margin al iz a tion of undoc u-
mented refugees in the interior of fort ress 
Europe concerns the rela tion between 
citizen ship and the value of human life. 
 Th ere is an inﬂ u en tial strand in crit ical 
theory which states that the refugee high-
lights the domin ance of the ﬁ gure of the 
citizen over that of the human. Writing in 
the aft er math of the Second World War, 
when millions of state less refugees roamed 
Europe in search of juridical protec tion, 
Hannah Arendt iden ti ﬁ ed a para dox ical 
eﬀ ect of human rights discourse. Th ose for 
whom the notion of human rights was 
inven ted, and who need them most, can 
have the most diﬃ   culty in access ing them. 
As Arendt writes in  Th e Origins of 
Totalitarianism : ‘if a human being loses his 
polit ical status, he should, accord ing to the 
implic a tions of the inborn and inali en able 
rights of man, come under exactly the situ-
ation for which the declar a tion of such 
general rights provided. Actually the 
oppos ite is the case’ ( Arendt 1973 : 300). 
Arendt high lights that instead of one’s 
human ity forcing civil treat ment, civil 
status determ ines who deserves humane 
treat ment. Arendt concludes her analysis 
of human rights – this section of the book 
is titled ‘Th e decline of the nation- state 
and the end of the rights of man’ – with a 
pess im istic conclu sion: ‘the danger is that 
 U
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
(UN)DOCUMENTED CITIZENSHIP 
shows how the non- citizen, Arendt’s 
‘savages’ or Agamben’s ‘homo sacer’, those 
who are oft en asso ci ated with a posi tion of 
ulti mate margin al iz a tion, act from a 
margin al ized posi tion. It is a good start ing 
point for a discus sion of the value of undoc-
u mented citizen ship. Whereas citizen ship 
and docu ment a tion, in the sense of pass-
ports, resid ence permits or oﬃ   cial recog ni-
tion of the right kind of refugee, seem to be 
inher ently connec ted, when we see citizen-
ship as a dynamic prac tice, it becomes 
possible to see citizen ship enacted by those 
without docu ment a tion. 
 All over Europe activ ism of undoc u-
mented migrants is taking place. To take a 
number of Western European examples: 
between 2008 and 2010 France witnessed a 
series of strikes of undoc u mented workers. 
Almost 7,000 workers occu pied compan ies 
and temp agen cies ( Kahmann 2015 ). Th is 
form of activ ism is not only an act that 
tries to reject margin al iz a tion, it is also 
an aﬃ  rm a tion of the construct ive civic 
pres ence of  sans- papiers (liter ally: ‘those 
without docu ment a tion’) in French society. 
Th e strike showed to what extent the 
French economy counts on undoc u mented 
workers. Th e name that was claimed by the 
activ ists was not ‘ sans papiers ’, but rather 
‘ ouvri ers sans papiers ’ (‘workers without 
papers’). Th ere is no ﬁ gure of the human it-
arian victim here, nor is there only the 
grasp of power, rather what was shown by 
the strike of undoc u mented French citizens 
is that undoc u mented migrants are 
margin al ized yet active and constitutive 
parts of society and hence can engage in 
acts of citizen ship. 
 Similarly, the Netherlands has known a 
protest move ment that uses the slogan ‘We 
Are Here’. Th e slogan is simple yet eﬀ ect ive: 
undoc u mented 
migrants 
have 
been 
making a life for them selves, oft en under 
extremely taxing circum stances, in the 
midst of Dutch civil iz a tion. Th e move ment 
this grim diagnosis is increas ingly unten-
able. Th ere is an urgent need to not just 
critique but also to change inhu mane situ-
ations around the borders of Europe. 
Emphasizing that any concep tu al iz a tion of 
the human is inher ently bound up with 
domin a tion and biopower para dox ic ally 
runs the risk of enfor cing rather than 
critiquing the power less ness of those who 
are most victim ized ( Lemke 2005 ). In the 
face of the plight of refugees both at the 
borders and within nation- states, this 
stance is woefully insuﬃ    cient. 
 Increasingly, schol ars argue that, contra 
pess im ist diagnoses as outlined above, citi-
zen ship can be the site of micro- resist ance 
(Papastergiadis 2006), and a rehu man iz a-
tion of those who are excluded ( Zembylas 
2010 ). In his  Acts of Citizenship , Engin Isin 
has formu lated an altern at ive concep tu al iz-
a tion of civic agency which is illus trat ive of 
this trend in crit ical theory: ‘we deﬁ ne acts 
of citizen ship as those acts that trans form 
forms (orient a tions, strategies, tech no lo-
gies) and modes (citizens, strangers, out-
siders, aliens) of being polit ical by bring ing 
into being new actors as activ ist citizens 
(claimants of rights and respons ib il it ies) 
through creat ing new sites and scales of 
struggle’ ( Isin and Nielsen 2008 ). 
 Deﬁ ning polit ics not as a play of actors 
with precon ceived notions, but instead as 
processes that expand the polit ical sphere, 
claimant of rights and respons ib il it ies, 
citizen ship is seen here not as a stable 
category, nor as an iden ti ﬁ c a tion which is 
completely at the hands of empire, but 
rather as a dynamic prac tice. Citizenship 
in Isin’s sense is claimed by those actors 
who claim rights and respons ib il it ies and 
those who create new sites and scales of 
struggles. Isin’s concep tu al iz a tion opens up 
civic agency to those who are usually not 
seen as claimants of it. 
 Th e activ ism of undoc u mented migrants 
them selves oﬀ ers a good start ing point. It
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
larger meta bol ism of diges tion and nour-
ish ment. As the Manifesto cites: ‘Th e matter 
of the world is endlessly cooked and 
devoured – the stomach is the big / outside 
us’ (Stanza 9). Against a paci fy ing and 
essen tial ist idea of ecology, Urbanibalism 
rejoices in the messy meta bol ism of nature 
in all its para sitic, ‘canni bal istic’ and endo-
sym bi otic rela tions. Its posthu man ism 
resides in its anti thesis to the idea of a 
natural equi lib rium and separ a tion of the 
 nature cul ture  continuum: ‘We should never 
abandon the city in favour of a virgin 
territ ory’, reads the very ﬁ rst line of the 
Manifesto (Stanza 1). While Urbanibalism 
perceives the city as a gigantic stomach, it 
does this along its econom ical, polit ical and 
colo nial fault lines. An import ant refer ence 
of Urbanibalism is the anti- colo nial 
‘Manifesto Antropófago’ by the poet 
Oswald de Andrade, which is a found ing 
text of the Brazilian avant- garde move-
ment  trop ic al ismo and histor ical chal lenger 
of Eurocentric human ism. In the western 
world Urbanibalism addresses new forms 
of biopol it ical control as repres en ted by 
‘green capit al ism’ and policies of sustain-
able devel op ment. ‘As there is no longer an 
outside, within the ideo logy of degrowth 
we have estab lished the borders of our own 
siege’ reads the last stanza of the Manifesto. 
 Methodology 
 In postu lat ing the stomach as the organ of 
percep tion and exper i ence of the surround-
ing world ( Umwelt ), Urbanibalism turns 
upside down the domin ant aesthetic and 
polit ical canon that is based on the cent ral-
ity of vision and, nowadays, compu ta-
tion. Urbanibalism deems the surround ing 
world, the  Umwelt , as an ‘extro ver ted’ 
stomach. Th is is posited by Urbanibalism as 
a neces sary thought exper i ment but also as 
a fertile provoca tion for emer gent posthu-
man epistem o lo gies. Such a neoma ter i al ist 
does not ask for recog ni tion of victim-
hood, it is not a plea for a human it arian 
embrace nor is it purely negat ive; instead it 
is a cour ageous aﬃ  rm a tion of pres ence. 
Th is slogan, if aﬃ  rmed by Dutch civil iz a-
tion, cannot but lead to a funda mental 
recon sid er a tion of the most found a tional 
ques tions of belong ing. 
 As these acts of undoc u mented citizen-
ship show, it is not merely a matter of inclu-
sion or exclu sion. Undocumented citizens 
are already part and parcel of polit ical 
communit ies. Indeed these acts show 
destruct ive margin al iz a tion and precar ity, 
and indeed these move ments make a claim 
for inclu sion and normal iz a tion of their 
status in juridico- polit ical orders, but they 
also showcase diﬀ er ent forms of civic 
engage ment. Th e chal lenge is to listen to 
and follow the example of these acts of 
undoc u mented citizen ship. Th e voices of 
undoc u mented citizens confront ossi ﬁ ed 
notions of human ity and civil treat ment of 
humans with creativ ity, courage and the 
demand to rein vent the current hori zons of 
civic engage ment. 
 See also Camp; Expulsions; Lampedusa; 
Stateless State; Violence;  SS = Security/
Surveillance. 
 Ernst van den Hemel 
 URBANIBALISM  
 A provoc at ive port manteau of the terms 
‘urban’ and ‘canni bal ism’, Urbanibalism is 
an artistic prac tice and polit ical agenda 
initi ated in Amsterdam in 2006 and encap-
su lated in the terse metric of the ‘Manifesto 
of 
Urban 
Cannibalism’ 
( Maas 
and 
Pasquinelli 2013 ). Urbanibalism envi sions 
the city, the envir on ment and even the 
cosmos from the point of view of  the 
stomach , that is from the perspect ive of a
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
URBANIBALISM 
ecology (see the ‘three ecolo gies’ by 
 Guattari 1989 ). 
 As artistic engage ment, dissen sual 
cooking and polit ics of exper i ment a tion, 
Urbanibalism is not only commit ted to 
mapping  Umwelten but to connect ing 
them in new constel la tions that are called 
 Convivia , from the Latin word for ‘feasts’ 
that means liter ally ‘living together’ ( con + 
 vivere ). Convivia are the ﬁ nal gath er ing of 
the  Umwelten  that have been discovered, 
explored and cooked. A communal feast 
with an always diﬀ er ent community of 
urban gast ro nomers that unveils the 
common dimen sion of any urban land-
scape and meta bol ism. 
 Posthuman Ecology 
 ‘Innervated by ﬂ ows of energy and matter 
/ the urban land scape is alive . . . build ings 
are liquid strata of miner als – just very 
slow’ (Stanza 2). Urbanibalism considers 
the city and the  nature cul ture complex as a 
tangle of ﬂ ows and strata ‘where the border 
between organic and inor ganic life blurs’ 
(Stanza 3). Th e world is seen as a  geolo gical 
meta bol ism where strata of diﬀ er ent 
natures overlap: inor ganic, organic, social, 
economic, linguistic, iconic . . . Philosopher 
Manuel DeLanda has given a good example 
of this in his descrip tion of archi tec ture as 
an exoskel eton of the human: 
 Th e human endo skel eton was one of the 
many products of that ancient miner al iz-
a tion. Yet that is not the only geolo gical 
inﬁ lt ra tion that the human species has 
under gone. About eight thou sand years 
ago, human popu la tions began miner al iz-
ing again when they developed an urban 
 exoskel eton : bricks of sun- dried clay 
became the build ing mater i als for their 
homes, which in turn surroun ded and 
were surroun ded by stone monu ments 
and defens ive walls. Th is exoskel eton 
served a purpose similar to its internal 
approach is not completely new and 
belongs to the history and anthro po logy of 
food and to so- called Material Culture 
Studies (see, for instance, the vision ary 
work 
of 
the 
Italian 
scholar 
Piero 
Camporesi). Central to this meth od o logy is 
the idea that gast ro nomy is a not a neutral 
and relaxed hobby but a cultural ﬁ eld which 
carries with it ‘the smell of the centur ies’ 
(Stanza 10), that is the redol ent traces of 
millen ary wars, colo nial inva sions and 
mass migra tions. Both art and gast ro nomy 
incarn ate a radical antag on ism against the 
fate of nature and history. ‘Culinary art 
arose from the invent ive ness of the poor 
against a matri cidal nature – and never 
from pauper ism’ (Stanza 10). Along this 
tradi tion, Urbanibalism can be deﬁ ned as 
‘materic art’ or ‘the art of living matter’. 
Th ese aesthet ics take issue with deﬁ n i tions 
such as food design, molecu lar cuisine or 
bioart where a larger and adequately 
scientiﬁ c notion of meta bol ism is missing 
or is only under stood in the isol ated sphere 
of a labor at ory setting. 
 Th e stomach is indeed an organ of 
thought(!). Urbanibalism readily alludes 
to the etymo logy of  Homo sapiens, that 
(contrary to ration al ist expect a tions) in 
the original Latin means ‘the human that 
has a good sense of taste’ (Stanza 8). In old 
Latin ‘to know’ ( sapere ) means ‘to have 
taste’. Th e meth od o logy of Urbanibalism 
moves from the subject ive exper i ence of 
the world to the meta bolic perspect ive of 
speciﬁ c forms of life: this could be a simple 
organ ism like a partic u lar yeast strain 
ﬂ our ish ing in the air of Brussels, a histor-
ical record as a war recipe book, a polit ical 
moment like the siege of Paris, the mineral 
compos i tion of Berlin tap water, an old 
Dutch still life of edible ﬂ owers, etc. Each 
form of life produces and absorbs its own 
 Umwelt of rela tions – a meta bolic and 
aesthetic 
ecology 
that 
Urbanibalism 
explores beyond the borders of tradi tional
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
tradi tions) – of ‘eating the earth’, usually 
ﬁ ne soil or clay. It has been regarded as a 
psychi at ric disease, a conﬁ ned cultural 
prac tice or a result of poverty and famine, 
but it has precise ritual and medical 
purposes and is a form of vital nour ish-
ment in a diet where other wise miner als 
are lacking. Th e craving for the earth is a 
reminder that our posthu man meta bol ism 
has always preceded us. 
 See 
also 
Animal; 
Food; 
Ecosophy; 
Naturecultures. 
 Wietske Maas and 
Matteo Pasquinelli 
coun ter part: to control the move ment of 
human ﬂ esh in and out of a town’s walls. 
 1997: 27 
 Th e borders Urbanibalism aims to subvert 
are situ ated between the deﬁ n i tions of the 
edible and edib il ity. To take a histor ical 
example from the French Revolution: 
‘Remember the siege of the Paris 
Commune, when communards ate the 
animals of the zoo and so engaged in a 
rebel li ous and joyful expan sion of the 
edible’ (Stanza 4). Overstepping the borders 
of comest ible/non- comest ible thresholds 
also occurs in the prac tice of  geopaghia 
(common to German as well as African
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
VERTIGO SEA 
regions of Norway,  Vertigo Sea has as its 
narrat ive spine two remark able books: 
Herman Melville’s  Moby-Dick  (1851) and 
Heathcote Williams’ epic poem  Whale 
Nation (1988), a harrow ing and inspir ing 
work which charts the history, intel li gence 
and majesty of the largest mammal on 
earth. 
 See also Blue Humanities; Capitalocene 
and Chthulucene; Hypersea; Lampedusa; 
Nomadic Sensibilities. 
 John Akomfrah 
 VERTIGO SEA  
 Film stills from John Akomfrah’s three- 
screen ﬁ lm install a tion  Vertigo Sea (2015), 
which 
explores 
what 
Ralph Waldo 
Emerson calls ‘the sublime seas’. Fusing 
archival mater ial, read ings from clas sical
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
 John Akomfrah,  Vertigo Sea , 2015, © Smoking Dogs Films.   IMAGES AND TEXT COUR TESY OF LISSON 
GALLERY.
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
VIBRANT MATTER 
 Vibrant Matter ( Bennett 2010 ) aims to 
enhance the  percept ib il ity of non- human 
forms of agency, where ‘agency’ refers to 
the capa city to inﬂ ect the direc tion of 
events and to make a diﬀ er ence to 
outcomes. Th e book tells an onto- story 
that plays with and begins to play out the 
idea that non- human things and forces 
actively shape the bodies they encounter, 
includ ing the humans who never fully 
possess or control them. Here the ﬁ gures 
of ‘thing- power’, ‘vital mater i al ity’ and 
‘vibrant matter’ are invoked. Th e short 
book also describes, and attempts to revive, 
aspects of past (Euro-American) onto lo-
gies or cosmo lo gies, wherein non- human 
bodies and processes were more sharply 
exper i enced as enter ing into, and enabling 
and constrain ing,  human action. 
 Th e book draws examples from contem-
por ary polit ical culture (concern ing food, 
abor tion, energy policy, a polit ical economy 
of extrac tion and waste), as well as from 
the work of Spinoza, Kant, the ‘crit ical vital-
ists’ Henri Bergson and Hans Driesch, 
Th oreau, Darwin, Gilles Deleuze and 
Bruno Latour – in order to make the case 
that  human  agency is itself an assemblage 
of human and non- human powers. When 
humans act, they do not exer cise exclus-
ively human capab il it ies, but express and 
engage a variety of other  actants , which is 
Latour’s term for an entity or a process that 
makes a diﬀ er ence to the direc tion of a 
larger assemblage without that diﬀ er ence 
being redu cible to an eﬃ   cient cause. 
Actants collab or ate, divert, vital ize, gum 
up, twist or turn the group ings in which 
they parti cip ate; or, as archae olo gists Chris 
Gosden or Lambros Malafouris argue, 
tools actively consti tute the styles and 
powers of human cogni tion and memory. 
If moderns tend to default to the assump-
tion – oft en for the sake of main tain ing the 
ideal of indi vidual moral respons ib il ity – 
that the most potent actants in a group are 
human beings, the book suggests that, in 
many cases, human inten tions, striv ings 
or delib er ate activ it ies are  not the key 
oper at ors. Sometimes, that role is played by 
a weather- event, or a food stuﬀ , chem ical, 
metal or phar ma ceut ical (or their sounds, 
smells, silent move ments, rhythms and 
momentums). To really acknow ledge the 
force of these other players would be to 
enhance our ability to detect with more 
subtlety what was, in a given case, the 
actual mech an ism of a partic u lar eﬀ ect – 
such as, for example, a black out or an oil 
spill or climate change or a gun culture. 
 One import ant example in  Vibrant 
Matter concerns the multiple agen cies at 
work to produce the elec tri city black out in 
2003 in North America (and later in the 
year in Europe). Th e govern ment and 
industry response in the  US  was to seek to 
identify some human – some Enron exec-
ut ive or energy trader – who was respons-
ible and then to punish him. Meanwhile, 
a whole series of other rela tion ships – 
between the elec tri city grid as infra struc-
ture, the legis la tion dereg u lat ing energy 
trading, the constant egging- on of the 
desire to consume, desire, and the natural 
tend en cies of elec tri city itself remained 
under- explored. As a result, the possib il ity 
of black outs today remains more or less 
the same. Th e fetish of the exclus ively 
human agent and the asso ci ated tend ency 
to deﬁ ne social prob lems as moral fail ures 
– and the impli cit assump tion that it is we 
humans who are always in charge – 
preven ted analysts from discern ing that 
the real locus of agency was an assemblage 
– of human and non- human actants. And 
it also preven ted us from pursu ing more 
 eﬀ ect ive forms of inter ven tion into that 
speciﬁ c conﬁ g ur a tion. Here the point is a 
prag matic one: ethics and polit ics can 
some times have more trac tion on mater ial
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
patterns of eﬀ ects than they can have on 
that elusive entity called the moral subject. 
 Th e book also took issue with a tend-
ency to frame stuﬀ  or things as ‘inan im ate 
objects’ that merely form the back ground 
context for  our actions – in other words, to 
consider this in ways that reserve the active, 
creat ive power for humans. A motiv at ing 
premise of the book is the idea that by 
parsing the world into passive matter (its) 
and vibrant life (us), we are limit ing what 
we are actu ally able to  sense . In other words, 
a strict separ a tion between matter and life 
places below the threshold of note the 
 active  powers of mater ial form a tions, 
such as the way land ﬁ lls are, as we speak, 
gener at ing lively streams of chem ic als and 
volat ile winds of methane, or the way 
omega-3 fatty acids in a diet will alter brain 
chem istry and mood, or the way indus -
 trial chem ic als that ﬁ nd their way into the 
water supply are ‘endo crine disruptors’. 
 In  Vibrant Matter ,  human agency, like 
any form of activ ity, is always some thing 
 distrib uted across a range of diverse bodies. 
When an I acts, it does not exer cise exclus-
ively human powers, but includes those of 
its food, micro- organ isms, miner als, arte-
facts, sounds, bio- and other tech no lo gies, 
and so on. Th ere are, of course, diﬀ er ences 
between a human indi vidual and a stone, 
but neither considered alone has real 
agency. To invoke thing- power or the 
vibrancy of matter is  not  to say that non- 
human objects have agency in the strong 
sense: a glass of water doesn’t have inten-
tions or a will. But it does makes sense to 
admit that it has propensit ies and insist-
ences, maybe even a kind of striv ing along 
the lines of what Spinoza called  conatus . To 
be clear: it is not that indi vidu ated objects 
are wilful subjects; but they can be power-
ful actants in oper a tion with others. Th e 
locus of agency is in prac tice always a 
human–non- human collect ive. 
 Vibrant Matter artic u lates a sens ib il ity 
that is sens it ive to the (mater ial) connec-
ted ness of all things, and it oﬀ ers one kind 
of radical critique of anthro po centrism. It 
is mislead ing to call it a ‘new’ mater i al ism 
or even a ‘post-’ human ism, for the philo-
soph ical perspect ive and the sens ib il ity it 
advoc ates sit along side a strong and lively 
tradi tion of (human) body femin isms, 
Marxist ecophilo sophies, Merleau-Ponty’s 
phenomen o logy, New Left  exper i ment a-
tions with eros and an under- explored tradi-
tion of indi gen ous think ing and sensing. 
 See also Animism; Ecomaterialism; Gaga 
Feminism; Joy; Material Feminisms; Non-
Human Agency; Ontological Turn; Post-
human Ethics; Trans- corpor eal ity. 
 Jane Bennett 
 VIOLENCE  
 To think viol ence today requires that we 
repos i tion ourselves, philo soph ic ally, legally, 
polit ic ally and ethic ally, in the space between 
certain extremes, them selves built upon 
violent histor ical categor iz a tions and exclu-
sions: human/non- human, subject/object, 
culture/nature,  physis / tekhnē , active/passive; 
the list goes on. 
 On the one hand, spec tac u lar images of 
violent acts, for instance those produced 
by the media machine of so- called Islamic 
State ( IS ) precisely for our consump tion, 
ﬁ ll our screens on a daily basis.  1 Such 
images, be they of grue some behead ings or 
immol a tions, demand that we consider the 
status of the human body as it relates to 
viol ence in our present moment. First of 
all, in today’s ‘wars of reli gion’ (if we can 
truly call them this), the ‘contem por ary’ 
must be thought through its untimeli ness. 
Here, as Jacques Derrida writes in 1996, 
but which is still of relev ance, viol ence has
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
VIOLENCE 
two ‘ages’: on the one hand, that which 
appears contem por ary, ‘in sync . . . with 
the hyper soph ist ic a tion of milit ary tele- 
tech no logy – of “digital” and cyber spaced 
culture’ (encryp ted commu niqués and 
hell ﬁ re missiles carried by unmanned 
aerial vehicles, for instance); and on the 
other hand, a ‘new archaic viol ence’ that 
coun ters or seeks revenge against the 
‘contem por ary’ and the attend ant decor-
por al iz ing, delo c al iz ing and expro pri at-
ing powers of the machinic and tele- 
tech nos cience (here iden ti ﬁ ed with the 
global market, milit ary- capit al istic hege-
mony and the whole sale global export of 
the European demo cratic model) (88–9). 
In the latter, viol ence carried out in the 
name of ‘reli gion’ reverts as closely as 
possible to the body proper and to the 
‘prem ach inal living being’ (ibid.: 88). 
Killings are enacted by ‘bare hands’ or at 
least prim it ive tools other than ﬁ re arms, 
and the casu al ties and collat eral damage of 
‘clean’ or ‘proper’ wars (fought at a distance) 
are continu ally supple men ted by tortures, 
behead ings and mutil a tions. 
 And yet, considered through the lens of 
decon struc tion and its render ing unstable 
of the defens ive borders between the 
organic and machinic, human and non- 
human, present and absent, actual and 
virtual, archaic and contem por ary, these 
two ages, modes and impulses appear to 
collapse into and fold between one 
another. 2 If there is a speciﬁ city to the 
manner in which we are to think viol ence 
 today , it is precisely through the contours 
of this anachrony and the viol ences enacted 
both as a response to and thanks to the 
impossib il ity of main tain ing such fant as-
matic distinc tions. For that which  appears 
contem por ary in its reli ance upon the 
speed and delo c al iz a tion of tech nos cience 
is in fact but a quasi- inﬁ n ite  accel er a tion – 
albeit more brutal – of a prin ciple of virtu-
al ity, viol ence and ruin that had always 
already been at work ( Derrida 2007 ), but 
that reveals itself all the more vividly today. 
Furthermore, in order to func tion, the 
revenge of the direct, corpor eal act of 
viol ence (for instance, in execu tion videos) 
oft en relies upon the heightened rhythm of 
medi atic power as the resource that makes 
possible the media events or ‘image oper a-
tions’ that under lie our contem por ary 
aesthet ics of terror ( Koltermann 2014 ; 
 Monzain 2009 ). 3   Here, images them selves 
func tion as hyper- eﬀ ect ive ‘weapons’, and 
the mater ial substratum of the image – 
together with its means of medi at iz a tion 
and archiv iz a tion – consti tutes the event as 
much as the human act ( Derrida 1996 ; 
 Schuppli 2017 ). 
 At the other end of the spec trum lies a 
viol ence of an alto gether diﬀ er ent speed, 
one that escapes the spec tacle- driven 
corpor ate media and our ﬂ ick er ing atten-
tion spans. Distinct from but related to 
struc tural viol ence, what Rob Nixon terms 
‘slow viol ence’ – typic ally not even perceived 
 as viol ence – is not time- bound or body- 
bound, but rather is attri tional and of 
delayed eﬀ ects (2011: 3, 11). Th is insi di ous 
viol ence, most oft en envir on mental and 
with everything to do with the ‘violent 
geograph ies of fast capit al ism’ ( Watts 2000 : 
8; cited in  Nixon 2011 : 7–8), as well as 
racism, elides the narrat ive closure of recog-
niz able visuals of the victory and defeat of 
war, instead working its way inwards, 
‘somat ized into cellu lar dramas of muta tion 
that – partic u larly in the bodies of the poor 
– remain largely unob served, undia gnosed, 
and untreated’ (ibid.: 6). In this context, 
most notably in the case of climate viol ence 
and what Adrian Lahoud names its attend-
ant ‘weapon iz a tion of Earth’ (2014: 495), 
viol ence must be re- thought in the absence 
of a punc tual act, a violent event. Unlike 
indi vidual acts of viol ence, or the indus tri al-
iz a tion of viol ence in modern warfare – and 
with this the necro power or thanato power
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
that accom pan ies or super sedes contem -
por ary biopower – this demands that we 
‘imagine a crime without a crim inal’, a 
viol ence ‘without coordin ates on which 
trans gres sions might be plotted’, in the 
poten tial absence of a weapon and, more-
over, a witness (ibid.: 496). 
 Th is, though, one might protest, is 
nothing alto gether new: as Ann Laura Stoler 
reminds us in her force ful work on imper ial 
debris and (ongoing processes of) colo nial 
ruin a tion, crit ical geograph ers, envir on-
mental histor i ans and histor ic ally inclined 
anthro po lo gists have been calling atten tion 
to what has now entered our lexicon as ‘slow 
viol ence’ for some time (2013: 11–12). What 
is relat ively new, however, is the attempts to 
bring various ﬁ elds of enquiry, includ ing 
post co lo nial schol ar ship and work of a 
posthu man ist bent, into a more organic 
conver sa tion – one that might at least begin 
to provide neces sary tools for resti tu tion 
and redress, and even legal preven tion – a 
complex task when the legal ‘person hood’ of 
the viol ator, from the multina tional corpor-
a tion to the state (oft en both), is anything 
but straight for ward. Here, a number of chal-
lenges arise: scientiﬁ c, legal, polit ical and 
repres ent a tional. In the realm of the latter, 
schol ars, activ ists and artists are called upon 
to make the unap par ent appear, to make 
drawn- out threats access ible to the imme di-
ate senses ( Nixon 2011 : 15). Aesthetic 
strategy demands recon cep tu al iz a tion. In 
order to render slow viol ence visible, speed 
must ﬁ rst of all be redeﬁ ned (ibid.: 13), as 
must causal rela tions and assemblages. In 
the work of the London- based Forensic 
Architecture project, for instance, ‘ﬁ eld 
caus al ity’ becomes the oper at ive concept 
through which conven tional modes of 
under stand ing viol ence are chal lenged, 
accom mod at ing for scen arios in which the 
envir on ment itself becomes the medium 
through which viol ence is carried out, and 
in which nature possesses a certain agency. 
Unlike in the behead ings videos mentioned 
above, where a direct line is trace able 
between the ﬁ gures of victim and perpet-
rator, estab lish ing ﬁ eld caus al it ies chal lenges 
the estab lished model of crim inal law and 
instead traces ‘force ﬁ elds, causal ecolo gies, 
that are nonlin ear, diﬀ used, simul tan eous, 
and involve multiple agen cies and feed back 
loops’ ( Weizman, 2014 : 27). In the end, we 
might say that in each of the two scen arios 
– the linear and the diﬀ use, the hyper- visible 
and the hyper- invis ible – we are faced with 
extreme viol ence. 
 As is already becom ing appar ent, the 
multi fa ceted strategies that beﬁ t the forms of 
viol ence we are faced with today entail a 
recast ing of our (i.e. Western) histor ic ally 
hier arch ical gaze away from the primacy of 
the human, as active, sover eign agent. 
History has taught us that ‘human ity’ is a 
shift  ing index; that ‘human ism’ is inher ently 
violent and goes hand in hand with the 
struc tural viol ences of racism, colo ni al ism 
and patri archy; that the biolo gical status of 
‘human’ is by no means the guar antor of the 
legal insti tu tion of ‘human rights’. As such, 
contem por ary invest ig at ive prac tices and 
concep tu al iz a tions, for instance ‘forensic 
aesthet ics’ ( Keenan and Weizman, 2012 ; 
 Forensic Architecture 2014 ), not to mention 
more- than-human or ‘compan ion species’ 
ethics ( Haraway 2003 ), must entail a 
hospit al ity towards think ing agency as 
distri b uted beyond the human, includ ing 
matter and non- human forms of life 
( Bennett 2010 ), and thus towards a malle-
able rela tion between subjects and objects. 
Shift ing atten tion from the  ﬁ gure (the 
human indi vidual; be this agent, victim or 
witness) to the  ground (collect ives, tech no lo-
gical assemblages or envir on ments; as the 
‘back drop’ against which a violent crime 
would conven tion ally be considered to have 
been commit ted), and as such break ing with 
the norms of human rights work, objects 
and envir on ments (includ ing digital ecolo-
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
VIOLENCE 
person hood, as a means of protec tions 
against viol ence and viol a tions, that has 
since the 1990s been explored under the 
banner of ‘non- human rights’, ‘the rights of 
nature’ or ‘Earth juris pru dence’ ( Tavares 
2014b ;  Demos 2015 ). Such a legal innov a-
tion (already prac tised to some degree in 
Bolivia and Ecuador) 5 entails a legal, polit-
ical, social, cultural and philo soph ical 
upheaval of extreme dimen sions, one that 
embraces radic ally altern at ive cosmo lo gies 
and perspect ives regard ing nature and 
culture (world views that have tradi tion ally 
borne the brunt of colo nial epistemic and 
mater ial viol ences) as well as the very 
premises through which we conceive of 
viol ence itself ( Viveiros de Castro 2015 ; 
 Franke 2010 ). 
 Such a project on the one hand takes us 
back to slow viol ence, as this relates to 
Indigenous struggles for human rights, and 
envir on mental justice in the global South. 
But it also opens up into more univer sal 
ques tions such as what Patrick Hanaﬁ n 
calls a ‘micro pol it ics of posthu man rights’, 
enabled by the think ing of Rosi Braidotti, 
that aims ‘to subvert the major it arian 
model of human rights as one premised 
upon the human as white neolib eral male’ 
( Hanaﬁ n 2014 : 214). In this concep tion of 
posthu man rights that ‘embody the claims 
of trans versal assem blages of indi vidu als 
who do not see a binary cut between 
thought and action, life and death, envir on-
ment and human ity, or anim al ity and 
human ity’, and who do not cede to the 
demands to divest oneself of one’s singu-
lar ity and become ‘human’ (ibid.: 215, 218), 
the chal lenge is to ﬁ nd strategies for 
aesthet i ciz ing and narrat ing slow viol ence 
that would entail moving beyond simply 
 human iz ing inac cess ible viol ences. 6   
 See also Naturescultures; Necropolitics; 
Neocolonial; Non- human Agency; Post-
human Rights; Technicity; War. 
gies) are registered not only as the ﬁ elds 
 through which  viol ence is enacted and medi-
ated, but also as the poten tially active 
 sensoria or  indic at ors that might bear witness 
to the (violent) crime – as soon as one learns 
how to access and read the traces ( Forensic 
Architecture 2014 ; see espe cially the chapters 
by Anselm Franke and Eyal Weizman). 
 But the non- human is not only an evid en-
tial ﬁ gure, assist ant to human demands for 
justice; neither is the envir on ment merely a 
passive victim of viol ence. Rather, war 
is waged against nature as if it were a crim inal 
 subject . Th is war is no longer fought merely 
in the name of progress, proﬁ t and secur ity 
(i.e. modern ity, colo ni al ism, capit al ism), 
but also as part of the global ‘war on terror’ 
that has ever- intens i ﬁ ed since the events of 
9/11 (burned into the  USA ’s psyche as  the 
deﬁ n it ive image of viol ence), 4 bring ing us 
back at least tangen tially – albeit in a 
distinct speed and register – to the media 
spec tacles of viol ence with which we began. 
In this context, as demon strated by Hannah 
Meszaros Martin’s research into the crim in-
al iz a tion of the coca plant in Colombia, the 
violent erad ic a tion of non- human life (for 
instance, through aerial fumig a tion) neces-
sar ily implies the erad ic a tion of the lives of 
the humans that inhabit a given envir on-
ment, as well as their ‘life worlds’. Such viol-
ence is legally sanc tioned in the name of 
ﬁ ght ing the ‘war on drugs’, as this inter-
twines with the global ‘war on terror’ – with 
both ‘wars’ serving as the smokescreen 
behind which states, legally or illeg ally, 
exert viol ence upon their human and 
nonhu man popu la tions ( Meszaros Martin 
2015 ). Th is theatre of oper a tions in which 
non- human life, here the object of ‘ecocide’ 
( Meszaros Martin 2015 ;  Tavares 2014a : 229; 
and  Zierler 2011 , cited in  Lahoud and 
Tavares 2013 ), is deemed ‘terror istic’ and in 
need of violent exterm in a tion, is but one of 
the contexts that intens i ﬁ es the need for a 
whole sale rethink ing of legal stand ing and
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
(2011: 13).  
 5. Th e only inter na tional or national courts 
that currently recog nize the rights of 
nature are Ecuador, under the consti tu-
tional provi sions estab lished in 2008, and 
Bolivia, under the Law of the Rights of 
Mother Earth, passed in 2010 (Tavares 
2014: 558). 
 6. ‘In a world permeated by insi di ous, yet 
unseen 
or 
imper cept ible 
viol ence, 
imagin at ive writing can help make the 
unap par ent appear, making it access ible 
and tangible by human iz ing drawn- out 
threats inac cess ible to the imme di ate 
senses’ ( Nixon, 2011 : 15). 
 Shela Sheikh
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
WAR 
situ ation’ (ibid.: 5). So, for war to break out, 
a second and third stage, named ‘confront-
a tion’ and ‘legit im a tion’ are neces sary. 
‘Confrontation’ relates to the parties 
involved coming to look upon the ‘contra-
dic tion’ as somehow relev ant, creat ing an 
antag on istic rela tion ship. During the third 
stage (‘legit im a tion’) viol ence is oﬃ   cially 
sanc tioned as the legit im ate course of 
action through the imagin ing of violent 
scen arios, what Schröder and Schmidt call 
‘violent imagin ar ies’. Finally, during ‘war’ 
viol ence is put into prac tice. 
 War oft en provides an enabling envir-
on ment for the accu mu la tion of wealth, 
social organ iz a tion and insti tu tional and 
tech no lo gical change. Contrary to propa-
gand istic portray als of war as a (sports) 
game or collapse, wars are not neces sar ily 
about winning, or implo sion and disorder. 
Rather, war is an altern at ive system of 
proﬁ t, power and protec tion. As famously 
argued in rela tion to the Second World 
War by Randolph Bourne, ‘war’ and ‘the 
state’ are deeply linked, and in a sense 
inter de pend ent: ‘War is the health of the 
State’, and the ulti mate act of state hood. 
‘States are deeply war machines, and the 
peace they make is the peace of  paci ﬁ c a-
tion ,’ says the Retort collect ive ( Boal et al. 
2005 : 94). In return, what we call ‘peace’ is 
oft en sustained by highly destruct ive forms 
of struc tural viol ence ( Galtung 1996 ;  Žižek 
2008 ;  Demmers 2017 ). 
 Over the past decades, remote ness in 
all its modal it ies (e.g. as distan cing or 
 WAR  
 War is a time at which viol ence is legit im-
ized, 
insti tu tion al ized 
and 
deployed 
against a construc ted enemy. Apart from 
being horriﬁ c and atro cious, war is 
normal ity. It repeats and repro duces itself 
through imagin ar ies which render it 
accept able and neces sary, and through 
insti tu tional forms which serve as war- 
making machinery. For Jabri, ‘War and 
violent conﬂ ict are social phenom ena 
emer ging through, and constitutive of, 
social prac tices which have, through time 
and across space, rendered war an insti tu-
tional form that is largely seen as an inev it-
able and at times accept able form of 
human conduct’ (1996: 4). For war to start, 
it ﬁ rst has to become imagin able. A crucial 
stage in the run- up to war is its dress 
rehearsal in the form of ‘million repe ti-
tions’ of ‘single words, idioms and sentence 
struc tures’ imposed on people ( Klemperer 
1947 [2000] ). Anthropologists Schröder 
and Schmidt argue that ‘viol ence needs to 
be imagined in order to be carried out’ 
(2001: 9). In describ ing the proces sual 
char ac ter ist ics of violent action they 
propose a four- stage model leading from 
‘conﬂ ict’ to ‘war’. Th e ﬁ rst stage, ‘conﬂ ict’, is 
seen as the socio- economic contra dic tion 
at the base of inter- party compet i tion. 
However, organ ized viol ence (‘war’) does 
not auto mat ic ally result from contra dic-
tion. ‘Wars are made by those indi vidu als, 
groups or classes that have the power 
success fully to repres ent viol ence as the 
 W
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
outsourcing) has become a char ac ter istic 
feature of warfare. According to contem por-
ary milit ary and secur ity doctrines the only 
adequate means to contain viol ence is to 
perman ently monitor the spaces of every day 
life in ‘zones of suspi cion’. We see the exten-
sion of war- like activ it ies in areas of social 
life that were previ ously sheltered from such 
intru sions. Drawing on buzzwords such as 
‘stabil ity oper a tions’, ‘integ rated missions’ 
and ‘coordin ated responses’ there is a widen-
ing of the scope of milit ary respons ib il it ies 
and tech no lo gies into contexts of non- war. 
Militarization has now moved into police 
work, human it arian relief oper a tions, migra-
tion manage ment, economic espi on age, 
crowd control and corpor ate secur ity. Th is 
tend ency to milit ar ize the social is certainly 
not conﬁ ned to the ‘Global South’ (although 
the South is now an open labor at ory for 
devel op ing the intel li gence poten tial of these 
tech no lo gies). In the Former West as well, 
tech no lo gic ally medi ated modes of sorting, 
recog ni tion and train ing are becom ing 
increas ingly soph ist ic ated, on the one hand, 
and popular ized on the other. From inﬁ lt ra-
tion in virtual worlds, through facial recog-
ni tion of car drivers nearing airports to 
drone surveil lance, state powers and corpor-
a tions aim to identify, separ ate and target 
bodies deemed malign and threat en ing 
from those deemed valu able and threatened. 
 Th e gami ﬁ c a tion of actual warfare, but 
also the rise of the war games industry 
foster new ques tions on the inter face 
between virtual and spatial war, fantasy and 
reality, combatant and gamer, simu la tion 
and authen ti city. Discussions on the 
connec tions between gaming and warfare 
oft en point at the use of games in milit ary 
recruit ment and train ing (such as the  US 
Army produced video game  America’s 
Army ) and the rise of the so- called 
‘milit ary- industrial-entertainment network’ 
( Der Derian 2005 ;  Graham 2010 ). Combat 
simu la tion games are designed to help 
soldiers prepare for war. Th e  DARWARS 
 Ambush! combat simu la tion game, for 
instance, was used to train soldiers bound 
for Iraq in milit ary convoy oper a tions ( Bray 
2004 ). But also the Hezbollah- produced 
game  Special Force was allegedly used to 
train anti-Israel para mil it ary troops in the 
Middle East ( Charles 2009 ). At the same 
time, mater ial warfare is increas ingly 
 cartoon ized . As King and Krzywinska 
high light: ‘devices such as head- mounted 
displays can be worn by troops, project ing 
onto their ﬁ eld of vision data not dissim ilar 
to some that is provided in games’ 
(2006: 199). 
 Leading in the ﬁ ction al iz a tion of 
warfare is the intensi fy ing use of armed 
drones in for instance the  CIA ’s assas sin a-
tion raids in Pakistan and the Middle East. 
Th e ‘pilots’ of the armed drones are located 
in virtual reality ‘caves’ set up in trail ers on 
Air Force bases on  US soil. As stated by 
Graham, here the ‘ubiquity of games and 
virtual simu la tions blends into the game- 
style reality of very real weaponry and 
killing’ (2010: 215). Graham describes how 
arms maker Raytheon in build ing its 
newest drone control system delib er ately 
used the same  HOTAS (‘hands on stick 
throttle’) system as a video game uses. 
According to Raytheon’s drone designer 
there ‘is no point in re- invent ing the wheel. 
Th e current gener a tion of pilots was raised 
on the [Sony] PlayStation, so we create an 
inter face that they will imme di ately under-
stand’ ( Graham 2010 : 215). What stands 
out in the debate on gami ﬁ c a tion is the 
issue of ‘distan cing’, the ‘sanit iz a tion’ of war, 
and the polit ical consequences of the blur-
ring of bound ar ies between game and 
combat. In this respect, the First Gulf War 
is oft en mentioned as the ﬁ rst example of 
‘Nintendo warfare’. One of the leading 
icons of that war was a video segment 
showing a smart- bomb target ing screen. 
Th e video places the viewer directly in
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
WEARABLE TECHNOLOGY 
the seat of an F-117 stealth bomber witness-
ing in detail how a laser- guided bomb 
descends on its target. Th is kind of top- 
down, abstract elec tronic imagery would 
become emblem atic in later  US  or  NATO -
led wars in Kosovo, Afghanistan, Iraq, 
Syria and Libya. For those not directly at 
the receiv ing end of armed aggres sion, 
warfare has become  play- station ized. 
 Th e new tech no lo gies of remote control 
and tech no lo gical warfare are increas ingly 
based on remote know ledge, relying 
heavily on cyber- intel li gence and meta- 
data (track ing the move ment of indi vidu-
als through their mobile phone use). 
Global Pulse ( UN project in Africa), Nexus 
7 ( US milit ary counter- insur gency in 
Afghanistan), Frontex ( EU external border 
surveil lance) and Eurodac ( EU internal 
control of irreg u lar migrants) all use 
geospa tial tech no lo gies to map and draw 
up secur ity governance. Current surveil-
lance tech no lo gies are much more subtle 
and soph ist ic ated than ever before and rely 
on select ive rather than gener al ized forms 
of control. An example of this is the way in 
which the  EU  makes use of satel lites with 
synthetic radar equip ment that are able to 
trace and track immig rants long before 
they have reached European borders. Th is 
way, fresh forms of exclu sion are produced 
which not only cut oﬀ  targeted groups 
from social parti cip a tion but do so in ways 
that are at times scarcely visible to the 
larger public. 
 Th is form of ‘perman ent war’, in seeking 
to normal ize itself, is in constant need of 
legit im a tion. It needs ‘weak citizen ship’ 
( Boal et al. 2005 ). It depends on audi ences’ 
passive consump tion of sanit ized images of 
war and the eternal evil enemy. Th e only 
possib il ity for war to trans form is if domin-
ant imagin ar ies and discourses begin to 
crumble, and doubt creeps in. Discourses 
of war are rarely fully hege monic: there is 
always some room for counter- real it ies. 
Th e ways in which the small Serbian youth 
move ment Otpor! engaged in discurs ive 
prac tices of resist ance against the Milosevic 
regime in the late 1990s, mainly by means 
of symbolic inver sion, satire and ridicule, 
and the dissem in a tion and perform ance of 
‘non- violent imagin ar ies’, are a mini ature 
example of how a domin ant discourse 
can be ‘toppled’. Th e de- legit im a tion of 
viol ence, its condi tions of possib il ity always 
somehow connec ted to trans form a tions in 
polit ical and mater ial struc tures of domin-
a tion, is a crucial stage in the weak en ing of 
the war machine. 
 See also Camp; Lampedusa;  SS = Security/
Surveillance; Violence. 
 Jolle Demmers 
 WEARABLE TECHNOLOGY  
 (Or: ‘Science Fashion’) 
 One of the excit ing new ﬁ elds in the creat-
ive industry is the integ ra tion of fashion 
and tech no logy. Wiring complex systems 
of micro pro cessors, motors, sensors, solar 
panels, (O) LED s or inter act ive inter faces 
into the fabric, textile or cloth ing turns 
them into smart garments that have a 
certain agency of their own. Designers 
exper i ment with these ‘smart mater i als’ to 
create examples like a dress that connects 
to Twitter, a catsuit that visu al izes 
emotions, a T-shirt that changes colour or 
trousers that measure the wearer’s vital 
func tions. Th ese examples show how 
‘[t]echno logy is now evolving faster than 
fashion trends’, as designer Katrina 
Barillova claims (cited in  Quinn 2002 : 73). 
Called ‘wear able tech no logy’, ‘wear able 
tech’ or simply ‘wear ables’, this new ﬁ eld 
places fashion among the consid er a tions 
of the posthu man. Some also use the term
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
‘techno- fashion’ ( Quinn 2002 ), while 
others prefer the label of ‘fash ion able tech-
no logy’ ( Seymour 2009 ,  2010 ). Given the 
futur istic look of many designs the term 
‘cyber- couture’ is also ﬁ tting ( Smelik 2017 ). 
 Wearable tech no logy is versat ile and 
can there fore be quite bewil der ing: it 
ranges from e- fashion, smart mater i als, 
wear able elec tron ics, solar energy and 3D 
print ing to bio- couture and nano tech no-
logy. Smart mater i als and smart garments 
can be under stood as protect ing the body 
or extend ing its phys ical func tions. 
Although cultural anthro po logy claims 
that clothes func tion ﬁ rst and fore most as 
decor a tion and adorn ment, clothes are 
also an exten sion of the skin, protect ing it 
against nature and society (see for instance 
 Flügel 1950 ). Within a context of tech no-
logy this idea derives from media guru 
Marshall McLuhan ( 2002 [1964] : 129–30). 
At the begin ning of the 1960s he sugges ted 
that all tech no logy is in fact an exten sion 
of the human body. In posthu man times 
tech no logy is not only a bodily exten sion, 
but also involves phys ical improve ment, 
enhance ment and expres sion. Wearable 
tech no logy can thus be used to control, 
improve and enhance human lives and 
bodies. As Lucy Dunne writes, ‘Th rough 
tech no logy, garments are now becom ing 
dynamic, respons ive, and aware; thus, they 
are better able to express our indi vidu al ity 
and meet our needs and wants’ (2011: 616). 
By wearing them directly on the body, 
people relate intim ately to tech nical objects 
and mater i als. Integrating tech no logy into 
clothes will there fore have an impact on 
how humans exper i ence their bodies and, 
by exten sion, the self. Or, as Tómicó and 
Wilde put it: ‘Wearables enable the wearer 
to enact iden tit ies’ (2015: 1185). 
 Dressing happens liter ally on the body; 
it is an active and embod ied prac tice 
( Entwistle 2015 ). Th us the bodily prac tice 
of dress ing is an import ant factor in 
construct ing one’s iden tity. Th e body is not 
a given, but some thing to put in shape or 
dress up for a ‘perform ance of iden tity’ 
( Smelik 2011 ). Fashion is thus an import-
ant way of perform ing iden tity in its many 
facets. Identity can in this sense be likened 
to the perform ance of a constant dress 
rehearsal ( Smelik 2016 ). Or, to put it diﬀ er-
ently: our iden tity is ‘wear able’. Technology 
is indeed one of the major factors in aﬀ ect-
ing iden tity and chan ging the rela tion to 
the body, and wear able tech no logy even 
more so because of its close ness to the 
body. Th is is not entirely new because 
human beings have always been closely 
connec ted to tech no logy. Th e scient ist 
who launched the term ‘cyborg’ in 1960, 
Manfred Clynes, says: ‘ Homo sapiens , when 
he puts on a pair of glasses,  has already 
changed’ (1995: 49, original emphasis). If 
this is the case for simple lensed glasses, 
just imagine how the human body and 
iden tity change with Google glasses; the 
new ‘geek chic’ ( Quinn 2002 : 97) that 
Diane Von Furstenberg brought to fashion 
in 2012. A few decades aft er Clynes coined 
the term ‘cyborg’, Donna Haraway launched 
the idea of the cyborg as a ﬁ gure that typic-
ally embod ies ﬂ uid iden tity, because it has 
‘made thor oughly ambigu ous the diﬀ er-
ence between natural and arti ﬁ  cial, mind 
and body, self- devel op ing and extern ally 
designed, and many other distinc tions that 
used to apply to organ isms and machines’ 
(1991 [1985]: 152). Th is is partic u larly 
relev ant for wear ables, since they shift  and 
push the bound ar ies between body and 
tech no logy. As Fortunati, Katz and Riccini. 
argue, ‘the body continu ally abol ishes the 
border between nature and tech no logy by 
convert ing one into the other’ (2008: 216). 
In under stand ing iden tity as a bodily 
prac tice that is performed time and again, 
wear able tech no logy oﬀ ers altern at ive 
and new ways of trans form ing iden tit ies. 
Exploring the wearer’s corpor eal and
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
WEARABLE TECHNOLOGY 
sensorial bound ar ies, wear able tech no lo-
gies enable the body to perform iden tity in 
and through smart clothes. 
 Today, a number of design ers exper i-
ment with the ways in which bodies can be 
shaped or iden tit ies performed beyond 
our wildest dreams, for example Hussein 
Chalayan, Iris van Herpen, Pauline van 
Dongen, Anouk Wipprecht, CuteCircuit, 
Suzanne Lee, Olek, Helen Storey, etc. Th ey 
seem to have taken Haraway’s plea to heart; 
an appeal ‘for  pleas ure in the confu sion of 
bound ar ies’ (1991 [1985]: 150; original 
emphasis). Th eir futur istic designs blur the 
bound ar ies between art, fashion, science 
and tech no logy. Th ey not only share a 
sculp tural, tech no lo gical and artis anal 
approach to clothes, but also a fascin a tion 
for stretch ing the form and shape of the 
human body and playing with human 
iden tity. 
 Recent studies in the ﬁ eld of wear able 
tech no logy provide an over view of tech-
niques and applic a tions ( Mattila 2006 ;  Cho 
2010 ), or summar ize its devel op ments and 
actors ( Quinn 2002 ,  2010 ;  Seymour 2009 , 
 2010 ), but, to date, few studies crit ic ally 
reﬂ ect on the socio- cultural dimen sions 
of wear able tech no logy (Toussaint and 
 Smelik 2017 ). Rather than giving an over-
view of what is possible in wear able tech-
no logy, I there fore prefer to draw out some 
prin cipal char ac ter ist ics that are relev ant 
for the posthu man: the emphasis on craft s-
man ship, the import ance of mater i al ity 
and embod i ment, and the inter play of 
iden tity. 
 Fashion design ers of wear able tech no-
logy share an intense love for craft s man-
ship and a hands- on engage ment with the 
mater i al ity of textiles and textures ( Smelik 
2017 ). Th e renewed focus on craft s man ship 
is closely connec ted to the tech no lo gical 
world we live in. As Richard Sennett writes, 
‘tech nical under stand ing devel ops through 
the powers of imagin a tion’ (2008: 10). Th e 
artis anal qual it ies that are imbibed in 
craft s man ship bring the tech no lo gies 
within the grip of our hands, making the 
high- tech world more human and access-
ible. Where for Sennett it seems to be 
impossible or utopian for craft s men to 
work with the machines product ively (ibid.: 
118), fashion design ers are keen to combine 
craft s man ship with tech no logy; it is not a 
ques tion of one exclud ing the other – they 
go hand in hand. Th is refers back to the 
original Greek meaning of the word  techne : 
art, skill, craft . Th e focus on craft s man ship 
betrays a new interest in the mater i al ity of 
matter in a high- tech world of virtual tech-
no lo gies ( Barrett and Bolt 2012 ). While 
fashion design ers focus ﬁ rst and fore most 
on the mater i al ity of textiles, and of the 
tech no lo gies involved, they are also inter-
ested in the mater i al ity of the human skin 
and body ( Rocamora and Smelik 2016 ). 
Moreover, they extend their fascin a tion for 
matter and mater i al ity to the tech no lo gies 
that they use; they have developed what 
Sennett calls a ‘mater ial conscious ness’ 
(2008: 119). 
 Th e issue of mater i al ity is para mount 
here, because matter is precari ous in an age 
of digital and virtual tech no lo gies ( Bennett 
and Joyce 2010 ;  Coole and Frost 2010 ). Th e 
notion of mater i al ity allows a focus on the 
actual matter of tech no logy and how – 
mater ial – bodies relate, oft en intim ately, to 
the tech nical objects that enhance clothes 
and also the iden tit ies of the wearer. Th ere 
is no doubt that tech no lo gical innov a tions 
will have a deep impact on the meaning 
and commu nic a tion of clothes and fashion. 
If tech no lo gic ally enhanced clothes can 
measure temper at ures, chem ical processes 
or vital func tions, sense move ment and 
posi tion, or have express ive qual it ies, they 
will change the rela tion of the wearers 
to them selves as well as trans form the 
commu nic a tion to and with others. 
Th e fact that the garments are worn on
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
account the body’s mater i al ity. One of the 
present chal lenges of wear able tech no logy 
is to bring the designs from out of the labs 
or oﬀ  the catwalks into the streets and 
shops. Only then will the tech no logy 
become ‘wear able’. ‘Embodied design’ ( van 
Rompay and Hekkert 2001 ) may help to 
take this into account more seri ously, with 
a stronger focus on the mater i al ity of the 
design, the exper i ences of the phys ical 
body, and of the social and cultural context 
( Hummels and Lévy 2013 ). Wearable 
tech no logy should thus develop ways 
of integ rat ing the body’s tactil ity and 
sens it iv ity into the embod ied design 
( Smelik, Toussaint and van Dongen 2016 ). 
 Wearable 
tech no logy 
extends 
the 
possib il it ies and func tions of fashion as an 
embod ied perform ance of iden tity. Th is is 
where the futur istic designs of ‘science 
fashion’, as I propose to call it, can help to 
shape and change posthu man iden tit ies 
diﬀ er ently. Moving in- between art, fashion, 
science and tech no logy, fashion design ers 
exper i ment with the ways in which the 
posthu man can shape their bodies or 
perform their iden tit ies. Clearly, they move 
out of the comfort zone or bedroom ward-
robes into a fantasy world, where they take 
pleas ure in confus ing bound ar ies between 
human and cyborg, or human and animal, 
but also shift  ambigu ous borders between 
skin and textile, organic and tech no lo gical, 
mater ial and digital. Posthuman science 
fashion shares a futur istic outlook, opening 
up a horizon beyond conven tional fashion. 
In their shared fascin a tion for stretch ing 
the bound ar ies of the human body, the 
design ers tempt the wearer to put their 
iden tity at play. Fashion design ers of wear-
able tech no logy chal lenge the poten tial 
wearer to engage aﬀ ect ively with the fusion 
of art, fashion, science and tech no logy, 
embark ing on a trans form at ive process of 
becom ing in the sense of Deleuze and 
Guattari ( 1987 ). Science fashion is thus 
part and parcel of an open- ended process 
of becom ing- posthu man. Th e strange 
shapes and forms of smart textiles and 
smart mater i als invite a reﬂ ec tion on new 
forms of both embod i ment and human 
iden tity. By reshap ing the human body 
beyond its ﬁ nite contours, science fashion 
oﬀ ers an encounter between art, fashion, 
science and tech no logy, opening up to a 
future world where smart garments 
are merged with human skin, body and 
iden tity. 
 See 
also 
Ecologies 
of 
Architecture; 
Mattering; Medianatures; Transcorporeality. 
 Anneke Smelik
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
XENOFEMINISM 
that it advances ‘a non- dual istic under-
stand ing of nature–culture inter ac tion’ 
( Braidotti 2013 : 3), the project invites the 
reader to see it as a call to, and for, the 
posthu man. Th at being said, however, 
the xenofem in ist mani festo demon strates 
consid er able debts to some of the key 
tenets of earlier human ist think ing – not 
least in its reli ance upon ideas of reason, 
ration al ity and the univer sal. Th is reli ance 
is tele graphed at numer ous points through-
out the text, from the insist ence on reason 
as an engine of femin ist eman cip a tion, to 
the expli cit claim that ‘Xenofeminism is a 
ration al ism’ ( Laboria Cuboniks 2015 ). 
Given the posthu man traject ory of Laboria 
Cuboniks’s approach to gender polit ics, 
readers may well ques tion the collect-
ive’s use of such seem ingly old- fash ioned 
concepts. What is the point of running 
against those inﬂ u en tial currents of femin-
ist and posthu man ist think ing that have 
been so eﬀ ect ive in prob lem at iz ing the 
legacies of human ism? Th e util iz a tion of 
the idea of the univer sal has been one of 
the most contro ver sial elements of the 
project, and is import ant in under stand ing 
much of what char ac ter izes the xenofem-
in ist perspect ive. 
 Previous attempts to artic u late a 
univer sal have, as Rosi Braidotti astutely 
reminds us, been hampered by a wilful 
failure to be prop erly repres ent at ive; the 
univer sal subject is ‘impli citly assumed to 
be mascu line, white, urban ized, speak ing a 
stand ard language, hetero sexu ally inscribed 
in a repro duct ive unit and a full citizen of a 
 XENOFEMINISM  
 As David Roden attests, all forms of post-
hu man ism are ‘opposed to some form of 
human- centred world view’ (2015: 20–1). 
Xenofeminism – the theor et ical approach 
asso ci ated with the inter na tional trans fem-
in ist collect ive Laboria Cuboniks – is no 
excep tion. An interest in the assemblages 
within which social agents are embed ded is 
evident through out 2015’s ‘Xenofeminism: 
A Politics for Alienation’ – a text very much 
alive to the entan gle ment and co- consti tu-
tion of silicon- based and carbon- based 
actors. It makes frequent refer ence to 
current tech nos cientiﬁ c condi tions, from 
glob al ized cultures of e- waste, to the hyper-
sti tional phenomenon of the stock market, 
to suggest ive but embryonic advances in 
open- source medi cine. In so doing, the 
mani festo points to some of the ways in 
which tech no lo gical alter a tion might gener-
ate radical alter ity. ‘Nature’, mean while, 
emerges as a recur rent force in the project 
– not as a natur al iz ing or essen tial iz ing 
under pin ning for gender and eco- polit ics, 
but as an always already tech no lo gized 
space of contest a tion that funda ment ally 
shapes lived exper i ences. Th is is captured in 
the mani festo’s ulti mate call to action: ‘If 
nature is unjust, change nature!’ ( Laboria 
Cuboniks 2015 ). 
 Th e subject of xenofem in ism, then, is 
neither woman nor human, if these terms 
are under stood as suggest ing discrete entit-
ies snipped from the wider fabric of tech-
no ma ter ial exist ence. Instead, to the extent 
 X
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
recog nized polity’ (2013: 65). Th e wary 
response that the mani festo has received 
from some quar ters reﬂ ects under stand-
able crit ical anxi et ies, given the prob lem-
atic history of this concept. Critics argue 
that to emphas ize the generic is to go 
against estab lished inter sec tional prac tices, 
and that to engage with the univer sal is to 
ignore the signi ﬁ c ance of diﬀ er ence 
(includ ing racial diﬀ er ence). Xenofeminism 
appre ci ates that inter sec tional methods 
have signi ﬁ c antly enhanced femin ist theor-
et ical approaches, demand ing a sustained 
sens it iv ity to ‘the possib il ity of compound 
discrim in a tion’ and priv ilege ( Crenshaw 
1989 : 148). Th is approach has promp ted 
femin ists to engage in what Kimberlé 
Crenshaw refers to as ‘asking the other 
ques tion’ (1991: 1245) – reﬂ ect ing upon the 
implic a tions of an issue in the light of 
numer ous (and oft en over looked) struc-
tures of oppres sion. Certainly, xenofem in-
ism seeks to retain the myriad insights of 
this approach and to apply them to emer-
ging tech no cul tures, but it does not see the 
need to abandon the univer sal in order to 
do this. 
 Indeed, xenofem in ism precisely aims for 
an  inter sec tional univer sal – that is, a ‘polit ics 
assembled from the needs of every human, 
cutting across race, ability, economic stand-
ing, and geograph ical posi tion’ ( Laboria 
Cuboniks 2015 ). For xenofem in ism, the 
univer sal repres ents the forging of inter sec-
tions, slicing through partic u lar local it ies 
(our bounded phenomen o lo gical condi tion) 
towards vectors of unanti cip ated and 
construc ted solid ar it ies (formed, in part, by 
‘asking the other ques tion(s)’). Th is is in 
direct oppos i tion to the bloated partic u lar ity 
that 
has 
conven tion ally 
been 
passed 
oﬀ  as the univer sal and which has largely 
cornered the market on popular under stand-
ings of the generic since the Enlight enment. 
Th e xenofem in ist chal lenge is not simply 
to reject univer sal ity, but to contest and to 
re- engin eer the univer sal. Th is is why Laboria 
Cuboniks seeks to posi tion the univer sal as a 
kind of ‘mutable archi tec ture that, like open 
source soft  ware, remains avail able for 
perpetual modi ﬁ c a tion and enhance ment’ 
(ibid.), and why the xenofem in ist project 
should be viewed as an invit a tion rather than 
a blue print. Far from tran scend ing the 
concerns of the social, then, the univer sal 
demands to be under stood as the perpetu ally 
unﬁ n ished busi ness of the polit ical. As 
Dominic Fox remarks in his review of the 
manifesto, xenofeminism points to ‘the 
extreme delicacy of the universal, the care 
that must be taken at every point to preserve 
its genericity, its quality of being “neither this 
nor that and both somewhat this and 
somewhat that”’ (2015). 
 Th e domin ance of paro chial univer sal-
ism within human ist discourse, then, is not 
suggest ive of the funda mental infe li city of 
attempts to use the univer sal as a polit ical 
tool. But still, the ques tion remains: why 
bother to contest for the univer sal at all? 
What does it have to oﬀ er this contem-
por ary posthu man femin ism? In order to 
answer this ques tion, I’d like to focus on 
two points: the ﬁ rst concerns the utility of 
univer sal ism for gender abol i tion ism, 
whilst the second relates to issues of scale, 
ambi tion and complex ity. Xenofeminism 
purports to be gender abol i tion ist. Th at is 
to say, it seeks to unpick those natur al ized 
and cultur ally weapon ized markers of 
iden tity that harbour oppres sions and 
injustices. Laboria Cuboniks’s abol i tion ist 
project is inves ted in ensur ing that traits 
assembled under the rubric of gender, race 
or class are stripped of their cultural signi-
ﬁ c ance and of their ability to act as a 
vectors of discrim in a tion. To be clear, the 
text does not advoc ate for the abol i tion of 
iden tity markers them selves (an enter prise 
which, in its poten tial quash ing of diversity, 
would clearly be undesir able). Instead, it is 
a commit ment to an ongoing polit ical
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
XENOFEMINISM 
struggle – a struggle that will not end 
until char ac ter ist ics now unevenly loaded 
with social stigma are preven ted from 
furnish ing a basis for asym met rical power 
rela tions. 
 Such a project of dismant ling tech no-
pol it ical, socio- embod ied matrices of 
discrim in a tion is buttressed by a set of 
ideas about the generic. Xenofeminism is 
quite expli cit about this, recog niz ing that 
‘the viab il ity of eman cip at ory abol i tion ist 
projects – the abol i tion of class, gender, and 
race – hinges on a profound rework ing of 
the univer sal’ ( Laboria Cuboniks 2015 ). It 
is here that the import ance of polit ic ally 
refus ing the paro chial univer sal becomes 
partic u larly appar ent. It is no good aspir ing 
to abolish a range of traits that act as 
lever age points for preju di cial power if 
this abol i tion leads only to the trap of 
‘bloated, unmarked partic u lars – namely 
Eurocentric univer sal ism’ (ibid.). It is for this 
reason that xenofem in ism insists upon agit-
at ing for an inter sec tional univer sal, where 
inter sec tion al ity is under stood not as the 
‘morcel la tion of collect ives into a static 
fuzz of cross- refer enced iden tit ies, but [as] a 
polit ical orient a tion that slices through every 
partic u lar, refus ing the crass pigeon hol ing 
of bodies’ (ibid.). A more univer sal univer-
sal, then, oﬀ ers substan tial polit ical aﬀ ord-
ances for eman cip at ory gender projects, 
and is in fact a prerequis ite for imagin ing a 
post- abol i tion moment to come. 
 Th e ﬁ nal point that I want to make 
about the univer sal as an activ ist tool 
speaks to issues of scale and resist ance. In 
the mani festo, Laboria Cuboniks write 
that ‘whilst capit al ism is under stood as a 
complex and ever- expand ing total ity, many 
would- be 
eman cip at ory 
anti- capit al ist 
projects remain profoundly fearful of 
trans ition ing to the univer sal, resist ing big- 
picture spec u lat ive polit ics by condemning 
them as neces sar ily oppress ive’ (ibid.). Such 
a posi tion clearly reson ates with the work 
of the Marxist soci olo gist Vivek Chibber, 
who argues that issues of scale and the 
‘univer sal iz ing drive of capital’ gener ate a 
partic u larly prob lem atic schism at the 
heart of contem por ary post co lo nial theory 
(2013: 285). Although it ‘presents itself as 
the analyt ical frame work of capit al ist 
domin a tion’, he argues, ‘it rejects the idea of 
a univer sal theory. Hence, it is in the 
awkward posi tion of the acknow ledg ment 
that capit al ism has been glob al ized, but 
denying that we can conceive a general 
theory of its func tion ing or its prop er ties’ 
(2015: n.p.). 
 For Chibber and Laboria Cuboniks, 
rejec tion of the project of construct ing a 
univer sal has contrib uted to a perceived 
diminu tion of polit ical agency and ambi-
tion. Many contem por ary eman cip at ory 
projects do not appear ‘propor tion ate to 
the monstrous complex ity of . . . a reality 
crosshatched with ﬁ bre- optic cables, radio 
and microwaves, oil and gas pipelines, 
aerial and ship ping routes, and the unre-
lent ing, simul tan eous execu tion of millions 
of commu nic a tion proto cols with every 
passing milli second’ ( Laboria Cuboniks 
2015 ). In short, we do not have ready to 
hand the requis ite concep tual resources 
for confront ing capit al ism, ecolo gical crisis 
or complex, embed ded struc tures of oppres-
sion. Th e wilful or unwit ting neglect of 
actions beyond the scale of the local and 
the micro pol it ical leads to the treat ment of 
univer sals as abso lutes, and gener ates ‘a 
debil it at ing disjunc ture between the thing 
we seek to depose and the strategies we 
advance to depose it’ (ibid.). If we are 
going to take the risk of advan cing large- 
scale, counter- hege monic gender- polit ical 
projects, xenofem in ism insists, it is imper-
at ive that we inter cede within debates 
about the oper a tion and consti tu tion of 
the univer sal. 
 Th e univer sal, then, is a mutable object 
of polit ical contest a tion, posi tioned at the
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
. . . which is no longer that of European or 
Eurocentric univer sal, rational subjectiv ity, 
but rather a radical trans form a tion of it’ 
(2013: 52). Note that this agenda is framed 
as a trans form a tion, however, rather than 
an outright rejec tion. If posthu man ism is 
to be a success ful polit ical project, the 
xenofem in ist claim is that we must inter-
sec tion al ize the once- paro chial univer sal, 
and remake it for ourselves and for our 
alien kin. 
 See also Feminicity; Rationalist Inhu-
manism; Trans*; Critical Posthuman 
Th eory. 
 Helen Hester 
heart of xenofem in ism for both its scaf-
fold ing of gender abol i tion ist ambi tions 
and its facil it a tion of counter- hege monic 
left ist projects capable of confront ing 
pervas ive (if unevenly distrib uted and 
diﬀ er en tially mani fes ted) networks of 
capital. Xenofeminism insists upon the 
univer sal not as an object but as a process 
– a tech no logy always in need of assembly. 
It is, to quote the mani festo, ‘not a univer sal 
that can be imposed from above, but built 
from the bottom up – or, better, later ally, 
opening new lines of transit across an 
uneven land scape’ (ibid.). I agree with 
Braidotti when she argues that the concept 
of the posthu man requires a ‘new agenda
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
YOUTH 
oﬀ er a correct ive here in an iden ti ﬁ c a tion of 
posthu man youth as a socio- tech no lo gical 
assemblage, diﬀ er ently consti tuted in an 
inter sec tional grid of power rela tions. In this 
entry we address posthu man youth by 
unpack ing the geopol it ical micro- polit ics of 
four key stages in the tech no lo gical life cycle: 
manu fac tur ing, market ing, use and disposal. 
In this way, we demon strate how the post-
hu man exper i ence of youth ful tech no-
bodies diﬀ ers widely. Depending on speciﬁ c 
conﬁ g ur a tions of vectors such as gender, 
‘race’, class and geograph ical loca tion, tech-
no lo gies operate as prac tices of priv ilege or 
margin al ity.  
 Manufacturing 
 First, consid er ing the begin ning of the 
supply chain of gadgets, it is urgent to 
acknow ledge the precari ous lives of a 
substan tial segment of posthu man youth 
and chil dren. For example, in partic u lar 
loca tions in the Global South, such as the 
conﬂ ict zones in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, young people are forced to manu-
ally mine miner als like cassit er ite, wolfram-
ite and coltan. Th ese blood miner als are 
then used in the construc tion of consumer 
elec tron ics. Subsequently, in Foxconn and 
Pegatron factor ies in China and India, 
young rural migrants make up the main 
labour pool. Th ey work excess ively long 
shift s on the assembly line perform ing 
tedious, repe ti tious tasks assem bling smart-
phones and other consumer elec tron ics. 
 YOUTH  
 How do young people come of age as 
posthu man subjects? How do their already 
ideo lo gical and discip lined techno- bodies 
normal ize and contest domin ant ideas of 
what it means to be human? As new hard-
ware and soft  ware alter their envir on ments 
and every day prac tices, young people 
navig ate the oppor tun it ies that these shift s 
aﬀ ord in their quest to stake out their 
live li hoods and iden tit ies. In their rites 
of passage toward adult hood, young 
people can draw on new meta phors 
and perform ances stem ming from bio- 
tech no lo gical advance ments, includ ing 
wear able 
tech no lo gies, 
smart phones, 
quan ti ﬁ ed-self applic a tions, genetic engin-
eer ing and neuro phar ma co logy. 
 Reﬂ ections such as Bostrom’s ‘Why I 
want to be a posthu man when I grow up’ 
(2013b) illus trate the all-too-common 
tele olo gical narrat ive of progress and 
human enhance ment. Hope is projec ted 
onto future gener a tions’ accu mu la tion of 
posthu man capa cit ies. In this scen ario, as 
the human–tech no logy, nature–culture 
symbi osis stead ily advances to comple tion, 
posthu man poten ti al it ies will actu al ize 
and natur ally enhance health, cogni tion 
and emotional well- being and bring about 
univer sal equal ity and peace. However, 
although most young people in today’s 
world are cyborgs in some form, the 
determ in istic and univer sal iz ing notion of 
posthu man youth subjectiv ity must be 
prob lem at ized. 
 Y
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
of learn ing, work, play and social iz a tion 
for wealthy, predom in antly white, Western 
youth. 
 As a coun ter part to the tough phys ical 
labour of mineral extrac tion and manu fac-
ture, virtual sweat shops are another emer-
gent phenomenon in the Global South. 
In these sweat shops, labour ers perform 
basic routine work to build up credits and 
increase the virtual value of game char ac-
ters and avatars. Th e Massively Multiplayer 
Online Game ( MMOG )  World of Warcraft  
is most well known for the emer gence of 
‘gold- farmers’ who gain in- game currency 
sold glob ally for real money. Beneﬁ ting 
from global economic inequal ity, aﬄ  u ent 
users in the West who wish to save time 
can buy these ready- made char ac ters to get 
a head- start in their gaming and move 
up to higher levels. Nobody aspires to 
these very real and embod ied instances of 
contem por ary posthu man ity, and these 
processes oft en remain invis ible in domin-
ant academic and corpor ate narrat ives of 
shiny and sleek human augment a tion. 
 Marketing 
 Digital gadgets, which are connec ted to 
the inter net, increas ingly light weight and 
heavily branded by major new media and 
tech no logy corpor a tions, promise limit less 
educa tional 
oppor tun it ies 
for 
young 
people. Such prom ises span the devel op ing 
world, for instance in the One Laptop Per 
Child program, where techno- utopi an ist 
Nicholas Negroponte’s non- proﬁ t organ iz-
a tion sought to provide a low- cost laptop 
to every child without reli able access to 
educa tion. Th e ideal istic rhet oric about the 
cultiv a tion of the digital student also char-
ac ter izes the increas ingly gami ﬁ ed Western 
classroom, and can be seen in the wide-
spread enthu si asm for the construc tion 
game  Minecraft  , within initi at ives such as 
Minecraft Edu where game developers 
partner with teach ers to support game- 
based learn ing. What market ing mater i als 
repres ent ing these diverse contexts share is 
the heady discourse of the so- called digital 
native, the priv ileged child born(e) into an 
envir on ment satur ated by networked tech-
no lo gies along side disad vant aged youth 
requir ing char it able invest ment in their 
futures through connec ted devices. Th ese 
young subjects are seen as natur ally skilled 
and hungrily expect ant of instant an eous 
inform a tion, constant social network ing 
and myriad oppor tun it ies for iden tity play 
and explor a tion. At the same time, digital 
tech no lo gies are framed as leading inev it-
ably to better futures, without any mention 
made of the context in which they will be 
intro duced, in regions without reli able 
elec tri city, within over crowded classrooms 
and under fun ded schools, in tenuous 
zones of conﬂ ict. Th is is because market-
ing discourses focus not on the messy real-
it ies of the present, but instead share an 
orient a tion towards the future, with young 
people framed as tech no lo gic ally enhanced 
consumers and digit ally skilled workers 
in- becom ing. Indeed, these devices are 
posi tioned as the missing ingredi ent for 
young people destined to ride the digital 
wave towards new fron ti ers of connectiv-
ity, mobil ity and prosper ity.  
 Use 
 In their every day use of digital tech no lo-
gies, young people are on the front lines of 
chan ging deﬁ n i tions of self, privacy, polit-
ical parti cip a tion, author ship and labour. 
However, as a way of contex tu al iz ing and 
ground ing every day use it is urgent to 
consider how categor ies of diﬀ er ence vari-
ously conﬁ g ure youth ful users. Young, aﬄ  u-
ent, white people living in urban areas in 
the Global North are the main target audi-
ence of many social media applic a tions and
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
YOUTH 
hard ware innov a tions. Default iden tity 
categor ies and domin ant user norms on 
plat forms such as Facebook, Instagram 
and Snapchat revolve around white ness, 
Westernness, 
hetero norm ativ ity 
and 
conven tion ally gendered beauty stand ards. 
Th e time and energy of this target audi ence 
is most readily commod i ﬁ ed as their pres-
ence and selﬁ es, cat videos and tweets 
provide the free virtual labour corpor a tions 
need to attract other main stream users and 
to sell to advert isers. Th is partic u larly 
conﬁ gured 
‘norm at ive, 
virtual 
body’ 
( Nakamura 2011 : 388) is also reﬂ ec ted in 
the major ity of domin ant computer game 
avatars. At least two addi tional groups of 
users, who do not ﬁ t these norms, need to 
be distin guished. Th eir impact on digital 
culture diﬀ ers, and accord ingly they can be 
considered invis ible and hyper vis ible users. 
Invisible users are those non- norm at ive 
users who do not ﬁ t the domin ant imagin-
ary. For example, although for non- elite 
users like youth in inter net cafes in urban 
Ghana the inter net oﬀ ers a site to imagine a 
cosmo pol itan self, the inter net simul tan-
eously remains a ‘foreign commod ity’ for 
them ( Burrell 2012 : 51). Many youth there 
struggle to decode the impli cit ‘Euro-
American codes of social inter ac tion’ and as 
a result they are met with silence or aggres-
sion in their online encoun ters (ibid.: 5). 
Hypervisible users, on the other side of the 
spec trum, are noticed and ques tioned 
exactly because they do not ﬁ t the domin-
ant imagin ary of the user. A case in point is 
the Autumn 2015 European media- frenzy 
scru tin iz ing why Syrian refugees who ﬂ ee 
their war- torn country carry a smart phone. 
Th ose using commu nic a tion devices are 
either depic ted as bogus asylum seekers or 
they are considered unﬁ t to handle 
advanced tech no lo gies. Such frames replic-
ate histor ical narrat ives of other ing, depict-
ing racial ized bodies as somehow ‘cultur ally 
handi capped’ and tech nologic ally back ward 
( Gómez-Peña 2000 : 80–1). A recent 
 Independent news pa per head line aptly 
captured the skewed debate: ‘Surprised that 
Syrian refugees have smart phones? Sorry to 
break this to you, but you’re an idiot. You 
don’t need to be a white west erner to own 
a relat ively cheap piece of tech no logy’ 
( Malley 2015 ). In sum, rather than a norm-
at ive virtual body, the category of the 
posthu man user is intern ally diverse and 
combines posi tions of mater ial and 
symbolic oppres sion and priv ilege.  
 Disposal 
 Finally, consid er ing what happens aft er the 
use- value of digital tech no lo gies expires – 
once tech no lo gies become obsol ete by 
choice or design – invokes the typic ally 
invis ible context of tech no logy disposal 
and e- waste. Th e posthu man poten ti al it ies 
of the Global North’s imma ter ial fetish 
objects become recast as mater ial ruins for 
the Global South. For instance, Ghana’s 
e- waste dumps provide an addi tional 
layer of mater ial context over youth 
subjectiv it ies in the inform a tion economy 
( Burrell 2012 ). Situated just outside Accra, 
Agbogbloshie is a former wetland turned 
e- waste dump that oft en illeg ally takes in 
discarded elec tron ics both domest ic ally 
and from Europe and North America. 
Th e dump has proven to emit signi ﬁ c ant 
pollut ants into surround ing land, air and 
water, in partic u lar from the prac tice of 
burning elec tron ics. Th ese pollut ants aﬀ ect 
the local ﬂ ora and fauna, includ ing humans 
and espe cially chil dren, whose repro duct-
ive and neural devel op ment is inhib ited by 
the toxic chem ic als emitted from burning 
e- waste. Moreover, such e- waste dumps 
not only in Ghana but also in Nigeria, 
Pakistan, India and China tend to be popu-
lated by the most impov er ished young 
people in those coun tries, oft en young 
girls, trying to ﬁ nd any mater i als from
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
and resold. Th is second ary economy 
around e- waste illus trates the fallacy of 
promot ing ‘recyc ling’ as a solu tion to the 
prolif er a tion of obsol ete tech no lo gical 
arte facts. Th e posthu man youth working 
in scrap yards and e- waste dumps have 
their bodies penet rated by digital tech no-
lo gies in ways that severely under mine the 
narrat ives support ing the devel op ment 
paradigm of recyc ling and reusing tech no-
lo gies by donat ing them to chil dren in the 
Global South. Such dona tions tend to 
mean more products in e- waste dumps, 
more chil dren aﬀ ected by the toxicity of 
e- waste 
pollut ants, 
and 
ever 
fewer 
oppor tun it ies for young people in the 
progress ive fantasy of posthu man ism.  
 Conclusions 
 Speaking predom in antly of white, Western 
youth, Livingstone ( 2008 ) has noted that 
approaches to youth as digit ally enhanced 
subjects must remain balanced with a view 
to the ‘risky oppor tun it ies’ aﬀ orded by new 
media. Th e concept of risky oppor tun it ies 
comes into even more stark relief when 
framing the prom ises for posthu man youth 
in terms of the global micro- polit ics of inter-
sec tional youth subjectiv it ies engaged in the 
process of becom ing cyborg. In diﬀ er ent 
ways accord ing to local economic and social 
contexts, young bodies are being conﬁ gured 
by digital tech no lo gies through the chan nels 
of priv ilege and oppres sion. Youthful agency 
in this broader context must be recon sidered 
within local socio- tech nical assemblages of 
tech no lo gies, bodies and prac tices that shape 
the meaning of posthu man ity for diﬀ er en tial 
subjectiv it ies. 
 See also Neocolonial; Post Internet 
Hypersocial; Wearable Technology; Obsolete 
Technology. 
 Koen Leurs, Tamara Shepherd 
and Alison Harvey
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ZOMBIE 
century, when numer ous ships full of people 
kidnapped from Black Africa arrived on 
Haiti and other Caribbean islands. Th e 
complex and situ ated struc tures and systems 
of beliefs that these enslaved peoples from 
across the contin ent of Africa brought with 
them, inter mingled with elements of 
Catholicism and indi gen ous cults, has been 
trans formed into a syncretic reli gion of the 
Haitian voodoo.  1  
 Along with voodoo priests, there were 
 bokors  – malevol ent voodoo sorcer ers, 
who prac tised black magic. One of the 
rituals they performed (and, as Haitians 
believe, still perform) was zombi ﬁ c a tion, 
or trans form ing of someone into a living 
dead. According to the phar ma co lo gical 
descrip tion of this prac tice, the bokor gives 
to his victim, an ordin ary person, some 
strong neur o toxic drug, made likely of 
puﬀ  er ﬁ sh and other elements (see Davis 
1985: 117). Poisoned by this substance, a 
person falls into a cata leptic or leth ar gic 
state and is buried alive. Upon her ‘awaken-
ing’, the person, who was not dead in a 
proper sense but who lost some basic 
‘human’ capa cit ies, such as reas on ing or 
memory, is now only able to obey orders, 
and becomes an undead slave of a sorcerer; 
someone who could, for example, continue 
working at sugar cane plant a tions at night. 
Th e other hypo thesis points not to the 
chem ical, but to the psychic and social 
origin of the walking dead, the zombie. 
 Th us, before invad ing popular culture 
as danger ous, destruct ive undead corpses 
 ZOMBIE  
 Th e zombie is a species within a broader 
category of the  undead , or  living dead , 
which also includes ghosts, vampires and 
other creatures dwell ing at the border 
between what we call life and what we call 
death or constantly cross ing this border 
back and forth. Being a unique social 
phenomenon and at the same time a 
univer sal ized ﬁ gure of an intense collect ive 
imagin a tion, it occu pies a priv ileged posi-
tion in contem por ary mass cultures and is 
highly emblem atic for capit al ist modern ity. 
Th e zombie’s social onto logy comprises at 
least four stages, which we will call here  the 
four seasons of zombies . 
 As is emphas ized by Sarah Juliet Lauro 
and Karen Embry in their ‘Zombie 
Manifesto’, ‘Th e zombie is histor ic ally tied to, 
and has been read along side, the expan sion 
of global capit al ism. Th e zombie is a colo-
nial import: it inﬁ lt rated the American 
cultural imagin a tion in the early twen ti eth 
century, at the time of the U.S. occu pa tion of 
Haiti. We cannot take up the ﬁ gure of the 
zombie without acknow ledging its appro-
pri ation from Haitian folk lore’ (2008: 96). 
Haitian zombies are the most import ant 
part of the whole story not only because 
they repres ent a myth o lo gical origin of a 
univer sal cultural meta phor analysed here, 
but also because they endow it with an irre-
du cible histor ical mater i al ity. Th e ﬁ rst 
season thus begins with the  real life zombies , 
whose history is traced back to the French 
colo ni al ism of the seven teenth century and 
 Z
POSTHUMAN GLOSSARY
ﬂ ash, zombies were slaves. Even now, 
Haitian people are not afraid of a zombie 
– they are afraid of becom ing one. In colo-
nial times, the people of Saint Domingo 
considered death as the only escape from 
slavery, to which they were condemned by 
life. Death meant a return to the mother 
Africa, a passage to a second life of the soul. 
Th at’s why zombi ﬁ c a tion is the worst of all 
punish ments: it turns one into a slave for 
ever, without a possib il ity of dying prop-
erly, that is, ﬁ nally being set free. Slavery as 
a univer sal condi tion of being of Africans 
in Haiti was thus exten ded to their aft er life 
(see  Cohen 1972 : 60). In today’s Haiti, 
to raise the dead is oﬃ   cially a crim inal 
oﬀ ence, and zombies, who emerge as a 
result of the synthesis of the black magic 
and the black slave market, are considered 
as victims. How can we not compare it with 
the non- random fact that in ancient Egypt 
‘killed- living’ was the name for the captives 
who, instead of being destroyed phys ic ally, 
were killed symbol ic ally by slavery? 
 From here, the second season of zombies 
arises, in which they appear not as real- life 
entit ies, but as a  social meta phor , point ing 
at indi vidu als and groups of people who are 
deprived of freedom or free will. Interpolated 
by the symbol ism of modern ity, the zombie 
as an auto maton which only obeys orders 
remains for the prolet arian, trans form ing 
her living labour into dead capital in the 
process of alien a tion. Th e thing she produces 
and elab or ates does not belong to her; the 
wages she gets imme di ately go to the repro-
duc tion of her func tion in the produc tion 
processes where she is just a means. 
Structurally, for Marx, there is no big diﬀ er-
ence between a prolet arian and a slave – 
both are unfree, and their very human 
essence is basic ally reduced to the condi tion 
of the living dead ( Marx 1844 ). In the course 
of the devel op ment of contem por ary 
culture, the meaning of this social meta phor 
shift s from labour and produc tion to sheer 
consump tion. From the prolet arian, the 
zombie becomes consumer. It embod ies the 
very idea of consump tion as such, a non- 
stop devour ing, a thirst which can never be 
satis ﬁ ed, a desire with no subject. But the 
subject matter is still the same: the zombie 
as consumer remains unfree, submit ted to 
some external forces. Th us, in Russia, people 
call their  TV sets ‘zombie- boxes’ – some-
thing like ‘idiot box’ but with an addi tional 
meaning of tele vi sion as a means of mass 
zombi ﬁ c a tion. In fact, the contra dic tion 
between the zombie- produ cer (slave or 
prolet arian) and the zombie- consumer is 
dialect ical: let us appre ci ate the fact that 
every consumer by every act of consump-
tion contrib utes to the processes of the 
produc tion of value, upon which the capit-
al ist system is based. Th e civil society ruled 
by money itself resembles, as Hegel writes in 
his Jena texts of 1805–6, ‘a life of the dead 
body that moves itself within itself’ ( Hegel 
1979 : 249). 
 Th e zombie as a meta phor for unfree-
dom gives birth to the idea that every one 
might be or can poten tially become a 
zombie. Th is gener ates a kind of fear which 
contrib utes to the essen tial plot of the third 
season of zombies, who now change their 
nature and become priv ileged  cine matic 
creatures. In contrast to real- life Haitian 
zombies, 
contem por ary 
Hollywood 
zombies are species that seems to preclude 
any ﬁ gure of control. Staying at the border 
between comedy and horror, they repres-
ent pure destruc tion. Cinematic zombies 
repres ent an abso lute evil that oper ates 
on Earth without any purpose. It is not 
pois on ing, not a magic ritual, which turns 
one into a zombie, but a conta gion, a virus 
taken from another zombie or else where. 
Removed from their enslaved and prolet-
arian origins, which linked them to labour, 
they are now ﬁ gures of a pure negat iv ity 
and the main char ac ters of the apoca lypse
PO S T H U M A N  G L O SSARY
ZOMBIE 
and the reality that comes aft er. From their 
Haitian fore fath ers, they cari ca ture an 
appear ance that combines staring, unsee-
ing eyes, skin stuck to their bones, and 
clumsy move ments, with phys ical strength, 
inert ness and insens it iv ity – making them 
invul ner able. No doubt, cine matic zombies 
reﬂ ect an old millen nial Christian idea of 
immor tal ity of the soul. In a way, they are 
immor tal souls. Not only their name, 
zombie, must derive from the Kongo word 
for the soul,  nzambi , but their very exist-
ence points to the impossib il ity of dying: 
zombies are undead souls wander ing 
around within dead bodies which they 
animate. Th ink about their brain: in a great 
many movies, one can only kill the zombie 
by destroy ing its brain ( Lauro and Embry 
2008 : 95). A zombie’s brain might embody 
what Christians call the soul. It is an 
aft er life of the human, whose prop erly 
human char ac ter ist ics have now vanished. 
Moreover, if we continue to consider it 
within the frame work of the Christian 
narrat ive, the zombie is liter ally the resur-
rec ted. She lost everything: her name, her 
memor ies, her iden tity, her entire life, but 
some thing else rises up instead, when the 
dead are awakened. 
 By their fourth season, zombies propose 
an  eman cip at ory poten tial. Th ey are the 
surviv ors – not only of the apoca lypse, but 
they are the surviv ors over them selves. 
Th ey survived; that is, they left  behind, 
together with their human prop er ties, all 
of what made them depend ent on some-
thing. Th ere are no more sorcer ers: post- 
apoca lyptic zombies are without a master. 
Th ey survived their own slavery, be it the 
slavery of produc tion or the slavery of 
consump tion. Th ey went beyond human ity 
with its master- and-slave dialectics. Th us, 
in George A. Romero’s ﬁ lms zombies 
acquire class- conscious ness and, as the 
lower strata of the oppressed, complete 
what one might call ahistor ical mission of 
the prolet ariat – namely, to have done with 
capit al ism. Th ey do what human beings fail 
to do. Th ey learn how to organ ize a new 
type of collect ive, which does not consist of 
human indi vidu als, but is only based on the 
despair of those who have liter ally nothing 
to lose: even their bodies have already lost 
their integ rity. Instead of any kind of hope, 
they are driven by despair, and it is in 
despair that they do the impossible. Th ey 
have passed through the stage of an abso-
lute negat iv ity, through the end of the 
world, through death and decom pos i tion 
and through hell in order to pave the way 
for the posthu man revolu tion ary subjectiv-
ity; if someone does not like what it looks 
like, the zombie does not care. 
 However, before this, the ambi val ence 
between the zombie as a geohis tor ic ally 
and racially produced ﬁ gure, and as one 
formed in the alien a tion of produc tion under 
modern ity must also be atten ded to as 
one in which the history of colo ni al ism is 
scrubbed from the history of capit al ism by 
this trans- histor ical and trans- loca tional 
shift  of the zombie from a cultur ally con-
tin gent prac tice into one of a cultur ally 
produced imagin a tion. 
 See also Animacies; Animism; Non- 
human Agency; Static Glow. 
 Note 
 1. Research into this phenomenon can be 
found, for example in Davis 1985, 1988; 
 Cohen 1972 . 
 Oxana Timofeeva
Adorno ,  T. W. ( 1997 ),  Aesthetic Th eory , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Agamben ,  G. ( 1998 ),  Homo Sacer:  Sovereign 
Power and Bare Life ,  Stanford :  Stanford 
University Press . 
 Agamben ,  G. ( 2000 ), ‘ Beyond Human Rights ’, 
in  Means Without End:
CUMULATIVE
Antliﬀ  ,  A. ( 2011 ), ‘ Anarchy, Power and 
Post-Structuralism ’, in  D.  Rousselle and 
 S.  Evren (eds),  Post-Anarchism:A Reader , 
 160–7 ,  New York :  Pluto Press . 
 Anzaldua ,  G. ( 1987 ),  Borderlands/La 
Frontera:  Th e New Mestiza .  San Francisco : 
 Aunt Lute . 
 Appadurai ,  A. ( 1996 ),  Modernity at Large: 
 Th e Cultural Dimensions of Globalization , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Apter ,  E. ( 2006 ),  Th e Translation Zone:  A 
New Comparative Literature ,  Princeton : 
 Princeton University Press . 
 Apter ,  E. ( 2013 ), ‘ Said’s Terrestrial Humanism ’,  
in  E.  Apter (ed.),  Against World Literature:  
 On the Politics of Untranslatability ,  211–27 , 
 London :  Verso .  
 Aranda ,  J. ,  B.  Kuan  Wood and  A.  Vidokle 
( 2009 ), ‘ What Is Contemporary Art? ’ 
 e- ﬂ ux  11–12 ,  http://www.e- ﬂ ux.com/
journal/what- is-contemporary- art-issue- 
one/ [accessed  26 May 2016 ]. 
 Archey ,  K. ( 2012 ), ‘ Post Internet 
Observations ’,  talk commis sioned for 
 DLD 12 (Digital-Life-Design) ,  Munich , 
 22–24  January 2012 . 
  Arendt ,  H. ([ 1943 ]  1994 ), ‘ We Refugees ’, in 
 M.  Robinson (ed.),  Altogether Elsewhere: 
 Writers on Exile ,  110–19 ,  Boston :  Faber 
and Faber . 
 Arendt ,  H. ( 1973 ),  Th e Origins of 
Totalitarianism ,  New York :  Harcourt, 
Brace, Jovanovich . 
 Arendt ,  H. ( 1998 ),  Th e Human Condition , 
 London :  University of Chicago Press . 
 Aristotle ( 1991 ),  History of Animals Vol. III , 
in  Aristotle in 23 Volumes , Vol.  XI , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  Harvard University 
Press . 
 Armand ,  L. and  A.  Bradley (eds) ( 2006 ), 
 Technicity ,  Prague :  Litteraria Pragensia . 
 Armstrong ,  N. and  W.   Montag ( 2009 ), ‘ Th e 
Future of the Human ’,  diﬀ er ences:  A 
Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies , 
 20 ( 2/3 ). 
 Arrow ,  K. ,  B.  Bolin ,  R.  Costanza ,  P.  Dasgupta , 
 C.  Folke ,  C. S.  Holling ,  B. O.  Jansson ,  S. 
 Levin ,  K. G.  Mäler ,  C.  Perrings and  D. 
 Pimental ( 1995 ), ‘ Economic Growth, 
Carrying Capacity, and the Environment ’, 
 Science ,  268 :  520–1 . 
 Artaud ,  A. ([ 1947 ]  1976 ), ‘ Pour en ﬁ nir avec 
le juge ment de dieu’ [radio broad cast], ‘To 
Have Done with the Judgment of God ’, in 
 Selected Writings , ed.  S.  Sontag ,  Berkeley : 
 University of California Press . 
 Asafu-Adjaye ,  J. ,  L.  Blomqvist ,  S.  Brand ,  B. 
 Brook ,  R.  DeFries ,  E.  Ellis ,  C.  Foreman ,  D. 
 Keith ,  M.  Lewis ,  M.  Lynas ,  T.  Nordhaus ,  R. 
 Pielke ,  Jr. ,  R.  Pritzker ,  P.  Ronald ,  J.  Roy ,  M. 
 Sagoﬀ  ,  M.  Schellenberger ,  R.  Stone and  P. 
 Teague ( 2015 ), ‘ An Ecomodernist 
Manifesto ’  http://www.ecomod ern ism.
org/mani festo- english/ [accessed  9 
October 2015 ]. 
 Åsberg ,  C. ( 2008 ), ‘ A Feminist Companion to 
Posthumanities ’,  NORA:  Nordic Journal of 
Feminist & Gender Research ,  16 ( 4 ):  264–9 . 
 Åsberg ,  C. ( 2013 ), ‘ Th e Timely Ethics of 
Posthumanist Gender Studies ’, 
 Feministische Studien ,  31 ( 1 ):  7 . 
 Åsberg ,  C. and  Braidotti ,  R. (eds) 
( 2017 ),  A Feminist Companion 
to the Posthumanities ,  New York : 
 Springer . 
 Åsberg ,  C. ,  R.  Koobak and  E.  Johnson 
( 2001 ), ‘ Beyond the Humanist 
Imagination ’,  NORA:  Nordic Journal of 
Feminist and Gender Research ,  19 ( 4 ): 
 218–30 . 
 Aspe ,  B. ( 2013 ),  Simondon, poli tique du 
transin di viduel ,  Paris :  Dittmar . 
 Assarid ,  M. A. and  J.  Staal (eds) ( 2013 ),  New 
World Academy, Reader #4:  Th e Art of 
Creating a State ,  Utrecht :  BAK , basis voor 
actuele kunst . 
 Athanasiou ,  A. ( 2008 ), ‘ Anamneses of a 
Pestilent Infant :  Th e Enigma of 
Monstrosity, or Beyond Oedipus ’, in  N. 
 Panourgiá and  G.  Marcus (eds), 
 Ethnographica Moralia:  Experiments in 
Interpretive Anthropology ,  76–96 ,  New 
York :  Fordham University Press . 
 Atwood ,  M. ( 2013 ),  Th e MaddAddam 
Trilogy ,  London :  Bloomsbury .
CUMULATIVE
Cartographies ,  48–70 ,  Ann Arbor :  Open 
Humanities Press . 
 Barad ,  K. ( 2014 ), ‘ Diﬀ racting Diﬀ raction : 
 Cutting Together-Apart ’,  Parallax ,  20 ( 3 ): 
 168–87 . 
 Barad ,  K. ( 2015 ), ‘ TransMaterialities :  Trans*/
Matter/Realities and Queer Political 
Imaginings ’,  GLQ:  A Journal of Lesbian 
and Gay Studies ,  21 ( 2–3 ):  387–422 . 
 Baraniuk ,  C. ( 2015 ), ‘ Rappers’s “Hologram” 
Performance Shut Down by  US Police ’, 
 BBC News ,  27 July ,  http://www.bbc.co.uk/
news/technology-33679847 [accessed  21 
April 2017 ]. 
 Barlow ,  J. P. ( 1996 ), ‘ A Declaration of the 
Independence of Cyberspace ’,  Electronic 
Frontier Foundation ,  https://www.eﬀ .org/
cyber space- inde pend ence [accessed  21 
March 2016 ]. 
 Barnes ,  J. ( 2007 ),  Arthur & George ,  New 
York :  Vintage International . 
 Barrett ,  E. and  B.  Bolt (eds) ( 2012 ),  Carnal 
Knowledge:  Towards a ‘New Materialism’ 
Th rough the Arts ,  London :  I.B.Tauris . 
 Barthélémy ,  J. H. ( 2014 ),  Simondon ,  Paris : 
 Les Belles Lettres . 
 Barthélémy ,  J. H. ( 2015 ),  Life and Technology: 
 An Inquiry Into and Beyond Simondon , 
 Lüneburg :  Meson . 
 Barthes ,  R. ([ 1968 ]  1984 ), ‘ La mort de 
l’auteur ’, in  Le bruisse ment de la langue : 
 Essais critiques IV ,  Paris :  Seuil . 
 Barthes ,  R. ( 1975 ),  Th e Pleasure of the Text , 
 New York :  Hill and Wang . 
 Barthes ,  R. ( 1980 ),  La chambre Claire [ Camera 
Lucida ] ,  Paris :  Éditions Seuil/Gallimard . 
 Barthes ,  R. ( 1984 ), ‘ La mort de l’auteur ’, in  Le 
bruisse ment de la langue :  Essais critiques 
IV ,  Paris :  Seuil . 
 Bataille ,  G. ( 1955 ),  Lascaux, or the Birth of 
Art ,  New York :  Skira . 
 Bataille ,  G. ( 1986 ), ‘ Metamorphosis ’,  October , 
Special Issue  Georges Bataille:  Writings on 
Laughter, Sacriﬁ ce, Nietzsche, Un- knowing , 
 36 :  22–3 . 
 Bataille ,  G. ( 1988 ),  Th e Accursed Share:  An 
Essay on General Economy ,  New York : 
 Verso . 
 Bateson ,  G. ( 1972 ),  Steps to an Ecology of 
Mind ,  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press . 
 Bateson ,  G. ( 1988 ),  Mind and Nature:  A 
Necessary Unity ,  New York :  Bantam . 
 Baudrillard ,  J. ( 1983 ),  In the Shadow of the 
Silent Majorities . . . or the End of the 
Social ,  New York :  Semiotext(e) . 
 Baudrillard ,  J. ( 1995 ),  Th e Gulf War Did Not 
Take Place ,  Bloomington :  Indiana 
University Press . 
 Bauwens ,  M. ( 2012 ), ‘ Th esis on Digital Labor 
in an Emerging p2p Economy ’, in  T. 
 Scholtz (ed.),  Digital Labor:  Th e Internet 
as Playground and Factory ,  207–10 ,  New 
York :  Routledge . 
 Bauwens ,  M. ( 2014 ), ‘ Transitioning to a 
Commons- based Society ’,  Flok Society , 
 https://ﬂ ok so ci ety.co- ment.com/text/
xMHsm6YpVgI/view/ [accessed  13 
March 2016 ]. 
 Bauwens ,  M. and  Kostakis ,  V. ( 2014 ), ‘ From 
the Communism of Capital to Capital for 
the Commons :  Towards an Open 
Co- oper ativ ism, ’  tripleC:  Communication, 
Capitalism & Critique, Journal for a Global 
Sustainable Information Society ,  12 :  356–61 . 
   Bauwens ,  M.    and    Niaros ,  V.    ( 2016 ),       Value in 
the Commons Economy: Developments in 
Open and Contributory Value Accounting . 
 Berlin: Heinrich Böll Foundation. 
 BBC Guides , ( 2015 ), ‘ How do Algorithms 
Run my Life? ’  BBC iWonder ,  http://www.
bbc.co.uk/guides/z3sg9qt [accessed  16 
November 2015 ]. 
 Beauchamp ,  T. ( 2009 ), ‘ Artful Concealment 
and Strategic Visibility :  Transgender 
Bodies and U.S. State Surveillance Aft er 
9/11 ’,  Surveillance and Society ,  6 ( 4 ):  356–66 . 
 Beauchamp ,  T. ( 2014 ), ‘ Surveillance ’,  TSQ: 
 Transgender Studies Quarterly ,  1 ( 1–2 ): 
 208–10 . 
 Bechtel ,  W. and  R.  Richardson ( 2010 ), 
 Discovering Complexity:  Decomposition 
and Localization as Strategies in Scientiﬁ c 
Research ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Beck ,  U. ( 1992 ),  Risk Society:  Towards a New 
Modernity ,  London :  Sage .
CUMULATIVE
Bird-David ,  N. ( 1999 ), ‘ Animism Revisited : 
 Personhood, Environment, and Relational 
Epistemology ’,  Current Anthropology , 
 40 ( S1 ):  S67–S91 . 
 Bishop ,  R. ( 2011 ), ‘ Project “Transparent 
Earth” and the Autoscopy of Aerial 
Targeting :  Th e Visual Geopolitics of the 
Underground ’,  Th eory, Culture & Society , 
 28 ( 7–8 ):  270–86 . 
 Bishop ,  R. ( 2015 ), ‘ Smart Dust and Remote 
Sensing :  Th e Political Subject in 
Autonomous Systems ’,  Cultural Politics 
 11 ( 1 ):  100–110 . 
 Bishop ,  R. ( 2016 ), ‘ Felo de se :  Th e Munus of 
Remote Sensing ’,  Boundary2 , forth com-
ing. 
  Blaagaard  B. and  I.  van der  Tuin (eds) 
( 2014 ),  Th e Subject of Rosi Braidotti: 
 Politics and Concepts ,  London : 
 Bloomsbury . 
 Blackman ,  L. ( 2015 ), ‘ Th e Haunted Life of 
Data ’, in  G.  Elmer ,  G.  Langlois and  J. 
 Redden (eds),  Compromised Data:  From 
Social Media to Big Data  ,  247–71 ,   London, 
New Dehli, New York and  Sydney : 
 Bloomsbury . 
 Blackmore ,  J. ( 2002 ),  Manifest Perdition: 
 Shipwreck and the Disruption of Empire , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Blackmore ,  J. ( 2012 ), ‘ Th e Shipwrecked 
Swimmer :  Camões’s Maritme Subject, ’ 
 Modern Philology ,  109 ( 3 ):  312–25 . 
 Blanché ,  R. ([ 1955 ]  1980 ),  L’Axiomatique , 
 Paris :  Presses Universitaires de France . 
 Blanché ,  R ([ 1955 ]  1962 ),  Axiomatics , trans. 
 G. B.  Keene ,  New York :  Free Press of 
Glencoe . 
  Blaser ,  M. ( 2012 ), ‘ Ontology and Indigeneity : 
 On the Political Ontology of 
Heterogeneous Assemblages ’,  Cultural 
Geographies ,  21 ( 1 ),  49–58 . 
 Blum ,  H. ( 2008 ),  Th e View from the 
Masthead:  Maritime Imagination and 
Antebellum Sea Narratives ,  Chapel Hill : 
 University of North Carolina Press . 
 Boal ,  I. ,  T. J.  Clark ,  J.  Matthews and  M.  Watts 
( 2005 ),  Aﬄ  icted Powers:  Capital and 
Spectacle in a New Age of War ,  London : 
 Verso . 
 Boever ,  A.  (de) ,  A.  Murray ,  J.  Roﬀ e and
  A.  Woodward (eds) ( 2012 ),  Gilbert 
Simondon:  Being and Technology , 
 Edinburgh :  Edinburgh University Press . 
 Bogost ,  I. ( 2012 ),  Alien Phenomenology, 
or, What It’s Like to Be a Th ing , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Bogost ,  I. ( 2015 ), ‘ Th e Cathedral of 
Computation ’,  Th e Atlantic ,  15 January , 
 http://www.theat lantic.com/tech no logy/
archive/2015/01/the- cathedral-of- 
compu ta tion/384300/ [accessed  16 
November 2015 ]. 
 Bogue ,  R. ( 2003 ),  Deleuze on Literature , 
 London :  Routledge . 
 Bogues ,  A. ( 2003 ),  Black Heretics, Black 
Prophets ,  New York :  Routledge . 
 Bohr ,  N. ( 1958 ),  Atomic Physics and Human 
Knowledge ,  New York :  Wiley . 
 Bollier ,  D. ( 2009 ),  Viral Spiral:  How the 
Commoners Built a Digital Republic of 
their Own ,  New York :  New Press . 
 Bollier ,  D. ( 2014 ), ‘ Th e Commons as a 
Template for Transformation ’,  Great 
Transition Initiative:  Towards a 
Transformative Vision and Practice , April, 
 http://www.great trans ition.org/docu ment/
the- commons-as- a-template- for-
transformation [accessed  11 April 
2014 ].  
 Bonta ,  M. and  J.  Protevi ( 2004 ),  Deleuze and 
Geophilosophy. A Guide and Glossary , 
 Edinburgh :  Edinburgh University Press . 
 Boon ,  J. A. ( 1982 ),  Other Tribes, Other Scribes: 
 Symbolic Anthropology in the Comparative 
Study of Cultures, Histories, Religions, and 
Texts ,  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Bordenstein ,  S. R. and  K. R.  Th eis ( 2015 ), 
‘ Host Biology in Light of the Microbiome : 
 Ten Principles of Holobionts and 
Hologenomes ’,  PLOS Biology ,  13 ( 8 ), 
 http://journ als.plos.org/plosbio logy/
article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1002226  
[accessed  26 May 2016 ].
CUMULATIVE
Braidotti ,  R. ( 2011 ),  Nomadic Th eory:  Th e 
Portable Rosi Braidotti ,  New York : 
 Columbia University Press . 
 Braidotti ,  R. ( 2012 ), ‘ Interview with Rosi 
Braidotti ’, in  R.  Dolphijn and  I.  van der 
 Tuin (eds),  New Materialism:  Interviews 
and Cartographies ,  19–37 ,  Ann Arbor : 
 Open Humanities Press . 
  Braidotti ,  R. ( 2013 ),  Th e Posthuman , 
 Cambridge :  Polity Press . 
 Braidotti ,  R. ( 2016a ) ‘ Posthuman Feminist 
Th eory ’, in  L.  Disch and  M.  Hawkesworth 
(eds),  Oxford Handbook of Feminist 
Th eory ,  673–98 ,  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
  Braidotti ,  R. ( 2016b ), ‘ Th e Contested 
Posthumanities ’, in  R.  Braidotti and  P. 
 Gilroy  (eds),   Conﬂ icting Humanities ,  9–45 , 
 London and  New York :  Bloomsbury . 
 Braidotti ,  R. ,  K. K.  Bhaunani ,  P.  Holm and  H. 
 Ping- chen ( 2013 ), “ Th e Humanities and 
Changing Global Environments ”,  World 
Social Science Report 2013:  Changing 
Global Environments ,  506–8 ,  Paris : 
 UNESCO Publishing . 
 Brandom ,  R. ( 2009 ), ‘ How Analytic 
Philosophy Has Failed Cognitive Science ’ 
in  Reason in Philosophy:  Animating Ideas , 
 197–226 ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  Harvard 
University Press . 
 Brassier ,  R. ( 2001 ), ‘ AlienTh eory :  Th e Decline 
of Materialism in the Name of Matter ’, 
 unpub lished PhD thesis ,  University of 
Warwick ,  http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/
4034/1/WRAP_THESIS_Brassier_2001.pdf 
[accessed  1 January 2016 ]. 
 Brassier ,  R. ( 2007 ),  Nihil Unbound: 
 Enlightenment and Extinction , 
 Basingstoke and  New York :  Palgrave 
MacMillan . 
 Brassier ,  R. ( 2014a ), ‘ Speculative Autopsy ’, in 
 P.  Wolfendale (ed.),  Object-Oriented 
Philosophy:  Th e Noumenon’s New Clothes , 
 London :  Urbanomic . 
  Brassier ,  R. ( 2014b ), ‘ Prometheanism and Its 
Critics ’ in  R.  Mackay and  A.  Avanessian 
(eds),  #ACCELERATE:  Th e Accelerationist 
Reader ,  London :  Urbanomic . 
 Brassier ,  R. ( 2014c ), ‘ Wandering Abstraction ’, 
 Mute ,  13 February ,  http://www.metamute.
org/edit or ial/articles/wander ing- 
abstrac tion [accessed  23 November 2015 ]. 
 Bratton ,  B. ( 2016 ),  Th e Stack:  On Soft ware and 
Sovereignty .  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Braun ,  B. ( 2004 ), ‘ Querying Posthumanisms ’, 
 Geoforum ,  35 ( 3 ):  269–73 . 
 Bray ,  H. ( 2004 ), ‘ War 2.0 :  Cambridge ﬁ rm 
designs combat simu lator to help soldiers 
bound for Iraq ’,  Boston Globe ,  8 December . 
 Brayton ,  D. ( 2012 ),  Shakespeare’s Ocean:  An 
Ecocritical Investigation ,  Charlottesville : 
 University of Virginia Press . 
 Breazeal ,  C. ( 2002 ),  Designing Sociable 
Robots ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Breazeal ,  C. ( 2003 ), ‘ Toward Sociable Robots ’, 
 Robotics and Autonomous Systems ,  42 : 
 167–75 . 
 Brillouin ,  L. ( 1949 ), ‘ Life, Th ermodynamics, 
Cybernetics ’,  American Scientist ,  37 ( 4 ): 
 554–68 . 
 Brillouin ,  L. ([ 1956 ]  2013 ),  Science and 
Information Th eory ,  New York :  Academic 
Press (Kindle edition). 
 Brillouin ,  L. and  J. H.  Jeans ( 1921 ), 
 Dynamical Th eory of Gases ( 3rd ed.),  New 
York :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Brinkema ,  E. ( 2014 ),  Th e Forms of the Aﬀ ects , 
 Durham ,  NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Broeders ,  D. ( 2009 ),  Breaking Down 
Anonimity:  Digital Surveillance of 
Irregular Migrants in Germany and the 
Netherlands ,  Amsterdam :  Amsterdam 
University Press . 
 Brooks ,  E. ( 2013 ),  Europe is Ours:  Reclaiming 
and Critical Commitments ,  London : 
 Autograph- ABP . 
 Brooks ,  R. ( 2002 ),  Flesh and Machine:  How 
Robots Will Change Us ,  New York : 
 Pantheon . 
 Brown ,  B. ( 2001 ), ‘ Th ing Th eory ’,  Critical 
Inquiry ,  28 ( 1 ):  1–22 . 
 Brown ,  W. ( 2015 ),  Undoing the Demos: 
 Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Bruining ,  D. ( 2013 ), ‘ A Somatechnics of 
Moralism :  New Materialism or Material
CUMULATIVE
Catts ,  O. and  I.  Zurr ( 2014 ), ‘ Countering the 
Engineering Mindset :  Th e Conﬂ ict of Art 
and Synthetic Biology ’, in  J.  Calvert and 
 D.  Ginsberg (eds),  Synthetic Aesthetics: 
 Investigating Synthetic Biology’s Designs on 
Nature ,  27–37 ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT  
Press . 
 Celikates ,  R. and  D.  de  Zeeuw ( 2016 ), 
‘ Botnet Politics, Algorithmic Resistance 
and Hacking Society ’, in  I.  Gevers ,  I.  van 
der  Tuin ,  P.  Kockelkoren ,  D.  Kerckhoﬀ s    
and  F.  Wiersum (eds),  Hacking Habitat:   
 Art, Technology and Social Change , 
 207–17 ,   Rotterdam  :  nai010 publish ers .  
 Certeau ,  de  M. ( 1984 ),  Th e Practice of 
Everyday Life , trans.  Steven  Rendall , 
 Berkeley :  University of California Press . 
 Césaire ,  A. ([ 1972 ]  2000 ),  Discourse on 
Colonialism ,  New York :  Monthly Review . 
 Chaisson ,  E. ( 2005 ),  Epic of Evolution:  Seven 
Ages of the Cosmos ,  New York :  Columbia 
University Press . 
 Chaitin ,  G. ( 2006a ), ‘ Th e Limits of Reason ’,  
 Scientiﬁ c American ,  294 ( 3 ),  74–81 . 
 Chaitin ,  G. ( 2006b ),  Meta Maths.  Th e Quest 
for Omega ,  London :  Atlantic Books . 
 Chaitin ,  G. ( 2006c ), ‘ Epistemology as 
Information Th eory :  From Leibniz to  Ω ’, 
 Collapse. Philosophical Research and 
Development ,  1 :  27–51 . 
 Chaitin ,  G. ( 2007 ), ‘ Leibniz, Information, 
Math and Physics ’, in  Th inking about 
Gödel and Turing:  Essays on Complexity, 
1970–2007 ,  227–40 ,  Singapore :  World 
Scientiﬁ c . 
 Chaitin ,  G. ( 2012 ),  Proving Darwin.  Making 
Biology Mathematical ,  New York : 
 Pantheon . 
 Chakrabarty ,  D. ( 2000 ),  Provincializing 
Europe:  Postcolonial Th ought and 
Historical Diﬀ erence ,  Princeton :  Princeton 
University Press . 
 Chakrabarty ,  D. ( 2009 ), ‘ Th e Climate of 
History :  Four Th eses ’,  Critical Inquiry ,  35 : 
 197–222 . 
 Chalmers ,  D. ( 2010 ), ‘ Th e Singularity :  A 
Philosophical Analysis ’,  Journal of 
Consciousness Studies ,  17 :  9–10 . 
 Chamayou ,  G. ( 2015 ),  Drone Th eory , 
 London :  Penguin . 
 Chan ,  J. ( 2014 ), ‘
CUMULATIVE
xv–xxxv ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Cohen ,  J. J. ( 2015a ), ‘ Th e Sea Above ’, in  J. J. 
 Cohen and  L.  Duckert (eds),  Elemental 
Ecocriticism:  Th inking with Air, Water, and 
Fire ,  105–33 ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Cohen ,  J. J. ( 2015b ),  Stone:  An Ecology of the 
Inhuman ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Cohen ,  J. J. and  Duckert ,  L. ( 2013 ), ‘ Editors’ 
Introduction :  Howl, ’  postme di eval:  a 
journal of medi eval cultural studies ,  4 :  1–5 . 
 Cohen ,  J. J. and  L.  Duckert (eds) ( 2015a ), 
 Elemental Ecocriticism:  Th inking with 
Earth, Air, Water, and Fire ,  Minneapolis 
and  London :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Cohen ,  J. J. and  L.  Duckert ( 2015b ), 
“ Introduction :  Eleven Principles of the 
Elements ,” in  J. J.  Cohen and  L.  Duckert 
(eds),   Elemental Ecocriticism:  Th inking 
with Air, Water, and Fire ,  1–26 , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Cohen ,  L. ( 2003 ),  A Consumer’s Republic: 
 Th e Politics of Mass Consumption in 
Postwar America ,  New York :  Vintage . 
 Cohen ,  M. ( 2010 ),  Th e Novel and the 
Sea ,  Princeton :  Princeton University 
Press . 
 Cole ,  D. ( 2014 ), ‘ We Kill People Based on 
Metadata ’,  Th e New York Review of Books , 
 10 May . 
 Cole ,  T. ( 2012 ),  Open City ,  New York : 
 Random House . 
 Colebrook ,  C. ( 2004 ), ‘ Th e Sense of Space : 
 On the Speciﬁ city of Aﬀ ect in Deleuze 
and Guattari ’,  Postmodern Culture ,  15 ( 1 ), 
 http://pmc.iath.virginia.edu/text- only/
issue.904/15.1colebrook.txt [accessed 
 5 October 2015 ]. 
 Colebrook ,  C. ( 2010 ),  Deleuze and the 
Meaning of Life ,  London :  Continuum . 
 Colebrook ,  C. ( 2012 ), ‘ Feminist Extinction ’, 
in  H.  Gunkel ,  C.  Nigianni and  F. 
 Söderback (eds),  Undutiful Daughters: 
 New Directions in Feminist Th ought and 
Practice ,  71–83 ,  New York :  Palgrave 
Macmillan . 
 Colebrook ,  C. ( 2014 ),  Sex Aft er Life:  Essays 
on Extinction, Vol. 2 ,  Ann Arbor :  Open 
Humanities Press . 
 Colebrook ,  C. ( 2015 ), ‘ What Is It Like to Be a 
Human? ’,  TSQ:  Transgender Studies 
Quarterly ,  2 ( 2 ):  227–43 . 
 Coleman ,  G. ( 2012 ),  Coding Freedom:  Th e 
Ethics and Aesthetics of Hacking , 
 Princeton :  Princeton University Press . 
 Coleman ,  G. ( 2013 ), ‘ Anonymous and the 
Politics of Leaking ’, in  B.  Brevini ,  A.  Hintz 
and  P.  McCurdy (eds),  Beyond WikiLeaks: 
 Implications for the Future of 
Communications, Journalism and Society , 
 Basingstoke :  Palgrave Macmillan . 
 Coleman ,  G. ( 2014 ),  Hacker, Hoaxer, 
Whistleblower, Spy:  Th e Many Faces of 
Anonymous ,  London :  Verso . 
 Coleman ,  R. and  J.  Ringrose (eds) ( 2013 ), 
 Deleuze and Research Methodologies , 
 Edinburgh :  Edinburgh University Press . 
 Collier ,  J. and  S. J.  Yanagisako ( 1987 ),  Gender 
and Kinship:  Essays Toward a Uniﬁ ed 
Analysis ,  Stanford :  Stanford University 
Press . 
 Collins ,  S. ( 2004 ), ‘ Technology and Magick ’, 
 Scan:  Journal of Media Arts Culture ,  1 ( 2 ), 
 http://scan.net.au/scan/journal/display.
php?journal_id=35 [accessed  23 October 
2015 ].  
 Combes ,  M. ( 2013 ),  Gilbert Simondon and 
the Philosophy of the Transindividual , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Connery ,  C. ( 2006 ), ‘ Th ere Was No More 
Sea :  Th e Supercession of the Ocean, from 
the Bible to Hyperspace ’,  Journal of 
Historical Geography ,  32 :  494–511 . 
 Connolly ,  W. ( 1999 ),  Why I Am Not a 
Secularist ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Connor ,  M. ( 2013 ), ‘ What’s Postinternet Got 
to do with Net Art? ’,  Rhizome ,  1 November , 
 http://rhizome.org/edit or ial/2013/nov/1/
postin t er net/ [accessed  21 March 2016 ].  
 Coole ,  D. and  S.  Frost (eds) ( 2010 ),  New 
Materialisms:  Ontology, Agency and
CUMULATIVE
Darwin ,  C. ([ 1859 ]  2008 ), ‘ On the Origin of 
Species (1859) ’, in  Evolutionary Writings , 
ed.  J.  Secord ,  107–211 ,  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Davies ,  W. ( 2015 ), ‘ Th e Return of 
Social Government :  From “Socialist 
Calculation” to “Social Analytics”  ’, 
 European Journal of Social Th eory ,  2 ( 3 ): 
 359–77 . 
 Davis ,  H. and  E.  Turpin (eds) ( 2015 ),  Art in 
the Anthropocene. Encounters Among 
Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and 
Epistemologies ,  London :  Open 
Humanities Press . 
 Davis ,  N. ( 2009 ), ‘ New Materialism and 
Feminism’s Anti-Biologism :  A Response 
to Sara Ahmed ’,  European Journal of 
Gender Studies ,  16 ( 1 ):  67–80 . 
 Davis ,  W. ( 1985 ),  Th e Serpent and the 
Rainbow ,  New York :  Simon and Schuster . 
 Davis ,  W. ( 1988 ),  Passage of Darkness:  Th e 
Ethnobiology of the Haitian Zombie , 
 Chapel Hill :  University of North Carolina 
Press . 
 Dawn ( 2015 ), ‘ Jaws, the Slasher, and the 
Encounter at the Heart of Horror ’,  Horror 
Homeroom ,  5 July ,  http://www.
horrorhome room.com/jaws- the-slasher- 
and-the- encounter-at- the-heart- of-
horror/ [accessed  5 January 2016 ]. 
 De Gennaro ,  M. ( 2003 ), ‘ Fighting Humanism 
on Its Own Terms ’,  diﬀ er ences:  A Journal 
of Feminist Cultural Studies ,  14 ( 1 ):  53–73 . 
 De la Cadena ,  M. ( 2015 ),  Earth Beings.  
 Ecologies of Practice across Andean Worlds , 
 Durham NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Dean ,  J. ( 2005 ), ‘ Communicative Capitalism : 
 Circulation and the Foreclosure of 
Politics ’,  Cultural Politics ,  1 ( 1 ):  51–74 . 
 Dean ,  J. ( 2010 ),  Blog Th eory:  Feedback and 
Capture in the Circuits of the Drive , 
 Oxford :  Polity Press. 
 Dean ,  J. ( 2013 ), ‘ Society Doesn’t Exist ’,  First 
Monday  18 ( 3–4 ): n.p. 
 Dean ,  J. ( 2015 ), ‘ Aﬀ ect and Drive ’, in  K.  Hillis , 
 S.  Paasonen and  M.  Petit (eds),  Networked 
Aﬀ ect ,  89–100 ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT  
Press . 
 Dean ,  T. ( 2000 ),  Beyond Sexuality ,  Chicago : 
 University of Chicago Press . 
 Dearlove ,  J. E. ( 1982 ), ‘ Syntax Upended in 
Opposite Corners :  Alterations in Beckett’s 
Linguistic Th eories ’, in  M.  Beja ,  S.E. 
 Gorontarski and  P.  Astier (eds),  Samuel 
Beckett:  Humanistic Perspectives , 
 Columbus :  Ohio State University Press . 
 DeLanda ,  M. ( 1996 ), ‘ Th e Geology of 
Morals :  A Neo-Materialist Interpretation ’, 
 http://www.t0.or.at/delanda/geology.htm 
[accessed  21 December 2015 ]. 
 DeLanda ,  M. ([ 1997 ]  2000 ),  A Th ousand 
Years of Nonlinear History ,  New York : 
 Zone Books . 
 DeLanda ,  M. ( 2002 ),  Intensive Science and 
Virtual Philosophy ,  London :  Bloomsbury . 
 Deleuze ,  G. ([ 1962 ]  1983 ),  Nietzsche and 
Philosophy ,  New York :  Columbia 
University Press . 
 Deleuze ,  G. ([ 1963 ]  1984 ),  Kant’s Critical 
Philosophy:  Th e Doctrine of the Faculties , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Deleuze ,  G. ([ 1969 ]  1990 ),  Th e Logic of Sense , 
 New York :  Columbia University Press . 
 Deleuze ,  G. ([ 1976 ]  2000 ),  Proust and Signs , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Deleuze ,  G. ( 1979 ), ‘ Metal, Metallurgy, Music, 
Husserl, Simondon’, ‘Sur  Anti-Oedipe et 
 Mille Plateaux: Cours Vincennes – 
27/02/1979 ’,  Les Cours de Gilles Deleuze , 
  https://www.webdeleuze.com/textes/186   
[accessed  3 April March 2017 ].  
 Deleuze ,  G. ( 1980 ), ‘ Leibniz ’,  Web Deleuze , 
‘Cours Vincennes’,  http://www.
webdeleuze.com/php/texte.php?cle=
50&groupe=Leibniz&langue=2 [accessed 
 5 October 2015 ]. 
 Deleuze ,  G. ([ 1981 ]  2003 ),  Francis Bacon: 
 Th e Logic of Sensation ,  London and  New 
York :  Continuum . 
 Deleuze ,  G. ( 1988a ),  Foucault ,  Minneapolis : 
 University of Minnesota Press . 
 Deleuze ,  G. ( 1988b ),  Spinoza:  Practical 
Philosophy ,  San Francisco :  City Lights 
Books .
CUMULATIVE
Derrida ,  J. ( 1998 ), ‘ Faith and Knowledge :  Th e 
Two
CUMULATIVE
Eggers ,  D. ( 2013 ),  Th e Circle ,  New York : 
 Vintage Books . 
 Einstein ,  A. ( n.d. ), ‘ Albert Einstein Quotes ’, 
 BrainyQuote ,  http://www.brainyquote.
com/quotes/quotes/a/alberteins385842.
html [accessed  1 May 2016 ]. 
 Elbe ,  S. ,  A.  Roemer-Mahler and  C.  Long 
( 2014 ), ‘ Securing Circulation 
Pharmaceutically :  Antiviral Stockpiling 
and Pandemic Preparedness in the 
European Union ’,   Security Dialogue ,  45 : 
 440–57 . 
 Elkins ,  J. and  E.  Fiorentini ( 2017 ),  Visual 
Worlds ,  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Elliot ,  G. ( 1972 ),  Th e Twentieth Century Book 
of the Dead ,  London :  Penguin . 
 Ellul ,  J. ([ 1977 ]  2004 ),  Le Système tech ni cien , 
 Paris :  Le Cherche Midi . 
 Enloe ,  C. ( 1989 ),  Bananas, Beaches, Bases: 
 Making Feminist Sense of International 
Politics ,  London :  Pandora Press . 
 Entwistle ,  J. ( 2015 ),  Th e Fashioned Body: 
 Fashion, Dress and Modern Th eory ,  2nd 
ed.,  Cambridge :  Polity Press . 
 Ernst ,  W. ( 2013 ), ‘ Media Archaeology : 
 Method and Machine versus the History 
and Narrative of Media ’, in  Digital 
Memory and the Archive ,  55–80 , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
  Esedebe ,  P. O. ( 1994 ),  Pan-Africanism:  Th e 
Idea and the Movement, 1776–1991 , 
 Washington  DC :  Howard University Press . 
 Eshelman ,  R. ( 2008 ),  Performatism, or the 
End of Postmodernism ,  Aurora :  Th e 
Davies Group Publishers . 
 Eshun ,  K. ( 1999 ),  More Brilliant than the 
Sun:  Adventures in Sonic Fiction ,  London : 
 Quartet Books . 
  Esposito ,  E. ( 2011 ),  Th e Future of Futures: 
 Th e Time of Money in Financing and 
Society ,  Cheltenham :  Edward Elgar 
Publishing . 
  Esposito ,  R. ( 2008a ),  Bíos:  Biopolitics and 
Philosophy ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
  Esposito ,  R. ( 2008b ) ‘ Th e Paradigm of 
Immunization ’, in  Bios:  Biopolitics and 
Philosophy ,  455–77 ,  Minneapolis and 
 London :  Minnesota University Press . 
 Esteve ,  R. M. ( 2008 ), ‘ Symbolic Language in 
Early Modern Mathematics :  Th e Algebra 
of Pierre Hérigone (1580–1643) ’,  Historia 
Mathematica ,  35 ( 4 ):  285–301 .  
 Evans ,  B. and  J.  Reid ( 2014 ),  Resilient Life: 
 Th e Art of Living Dangerously ,  Cambridge : 
 Polity Press . 
 Evans ,  R. ( 1997 ), ‘ Interference ’, in  Translation 
from Drawing to Buildings and Other 
Essays ,  10–33 ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT  
Press . 
 Evans ,  R. ,  H.  Fulton and  D.  Matthews (eds) 
( 2006 ),  Introduction to Medieval Cultural 
Studies:  Essays in Honour of Stephen 
Knight ,  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press . 
 Everett ,  H. [[ 1956 ]  1973 ], ‘ Th eory of the 
Universal Wave Function ’, in  B. S.  DeWitt 
and  R. N.  Graham (eds),  Th e Many-
Worlds Interpretation of Quantum 
Mechanics ,  3–140 ,  Princeton University 
Press :  Princeton . 
 Everett ,  P. ( 1996 ),  Watershed ,  Boston : 
 Beacon . 
 Fabian ,  J. ( 2002 ),  Time and the Other:  How 
Anthropology Makes Its Object ,  New York : 
 Columbia University Press . 
 Fanon ,  F. ( 1993 ),  Black Skin, White Masks , 
 3rd ed.,  London :  Pluto Press . 
 Fanon ,  F. ( 2001 ),  Th e Wretched of the Earth , 
 London :  Penguin Books . 
 Farman ,  J. ( 2012 ),  Mobile Interface Th eory: 
 Embodied Space and Locative Media , 
 Abingdon :  Routledge . 
 Favell ,  A.  ( 2007 ), ‘ Rebooting Migration 
Th eory :  Interdisciplinarity, Globality and 
Postdisciplinarity in Migration Studies ’, in 
 C.  Brettell and  J.  Holliﬁ eld (eds), 
 Migration Th eory:  Talking Across 
Disciplines ,  2nd ed.,  259–78 ,  New York : 
 Routledge . 
 Feder ,  H. ( 2014 ), ‘ Ecocriticism, 
Posthumanism, and the Biological Idea of 
Culture ’, in  G.  Garrard (ed.),  Th e Oxford 
Handbook of Ecocriticism ,  225–41 , 
 Oxford :  Oxford University Press .
CUMULATIVE
Foucault ,  M. ( 1977 ),  Discipline and Punish , 
 New York :  Pantheon Books . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1978 ),  Th e History of Sexuality, 
Vol. I ,  New York :  Pantheon Books . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1980 ),  Power/Knowledge: 
 Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 
1972–1977 , ed.  C.  Gordon .  New York :  Th e 
Harvester Press . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1985 ),  Th e History of Sexuality, 
Vol. II:  Th e Use of Pleasure ,  New York : 
 Pantheon Books . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1986a ),  Th e History of 
Sexuality, Vol. III:  Th e Care of the Self , 
 New York :  Pantheon Books . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1986b ), ‘ Of Other Spaces ’, 
 Diacritics ,  16 :  22–7 . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1994 ), ‘ For an Ethics of 
Discomfort ’, in  Power:  Essential Works of 
Michel Foucault 1954–1984 , ed.  J. D. 
 Faubion ,  London :  Penguin . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1996 ), ‘ Th e Masked 
Philosopher ’, in  Foucault Live , ed.  S. 
 Lotringer ,  New York :  Semiotext(e) . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 2000 ), ‘ Bodies and Pleasure ’, in 
 More and Less , ed.  S.  Lotringer ,  238–48 , 
 New York :  Semiotext(e) . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 2001 ),  Power. Essential Works 
of Foucault 1954–1984:  Volume 3 , 
 298–325 ,  London :  Penguin Books . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 2003 ),  Society Must Be 
Defended:  Lectures at the Collège de 
France, 1975–1976 ,  New York :  Picador . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 2008 ),  Th e Birth of Biopolitics: 
 Lectures at the Collège de France 1978–
1979 , editions:  Houndsmille, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire :  Palgrave Macmillan ;  New 
York :  Picador . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 2009 ),  Security, Territory, 
Population:  Lectures at the Collège de France 
1977–1978 ,  Houndsmille, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire :  Palgrave Macmillan . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 2010 ),  Th e Birth of Biopolitics: 
 Lectures at the Collège de France, 
1978–1979 , reprint edition,  Basingstoke 
and  New York :  Picador . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 2012 ),  De woorden en de 
dingen , trans  W.  van der  Star ,  Amsterdam : 
 Boom . 
 Foulke ,  R. ( 1997 ),  Th e Sea Voyage Narrative , 
 Boston :  Twayne . 
 Fox ,  D. ( 2015 ), ‘ Transits :
CUMULATIVE
Gabrys ,  J. ( 2014 ), ‘ Programming 
Environments :  Environmentality and 
Citizen Sensing in the Smart City ’, 
 Environment and Planning D:  Society and 
Space ,  32 ( 1 ):  30–48 . 
 Gabrys ,  J. ( 2016a ),  Program Earth: 
 Environmental Sensing Technology and the 
Making of a Computational Planet , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Gabrys ,  J. ( 2016b ), ‘ Re- thingi fy ing the 
Internet of Th ings ’, in  J.  Walker and 
 N.  Starosielski (eds),  Sustainable 
Media ,   New York and  London : 
 Routledge . 
 Gailey ,  C. W. ( 1987 ),  Kinship to Kingship: 
 Gender Hierarchy and State Formation in 
the Tongan Islands ,  Austin :  University of 
Texas Press . 
 Gallagher ,  J. ( 2015 ) ‘ UK approves three- 
person babies ’,  BBC News ,  24 February , 
 http://www.bbc.com/news/health-
31594856  [accessed  29 November 2016 ]. 
 Galloway ,  A. R. ( 2012 ),  Th e Interface Eﬀ ect , 
 Cambridge :  Polity Press . 
 Galloway ,  A. R. ( 2014 ), ‘ Th e Cybernetic 
Hypothesis ’,  Diﬀ erences:  A Journal of 
Feminist Cultural Studies ,  25 ( 1 ):  107–31 . 
 Galloway ,  A. and  E.  Th acker ( 2007 ),  Th e 
Exploit:  A Th eory of Networks , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Galtung ,  J. ( 1996 ),  Peace by Peaceful Means: 
 Peace and Conﬂ ict, Development and 
Civilization ,  London :  Sage . 
 Garelli ,  G. ,  F.  Sossi and  M.  Tazzioli (eds) 
( 2013 ),  Spaces in Migration:  Postcards of a 
Revolution ,  London :  Pavement Books . 
 Gatens ,  M. ( 2000 ), ‘ Feminism as “Password” : 
 Re- think ing the “Possible” with Spinoza 
and Deleuze ’,  Hypatia ,  15 ( 2 ):  59–75 .  
 Gatens ,  M. and  G.  Lloyd ( 1999 ),  Collective 
Imaginings:  Spinoza, Past and Present , 
 London :  Routledge . 
 Genova ,  N.  (de) ( 2013 ), ‘ Spectacles of 
Migrant “Illegality” :  Th e Scene of 
Exclusion, the Obscene of Inclusion ’, 
 Ethnic and Racial Studies ,  36 ( 7 ):  1180–98 . 
Gevers, I., I. van der Tuin, P. Kockelkoren, 
D. Kerckhoﬀ s and F. Wiersum (eds), 
Hacking Habitat: Art, Technology and 
Social Change, Rotterdam: nai010 
publishers. 
Ghosh ,  A. ( 2001 ),  Th e Calcutta Chromosome: 
 A Novel of Fevers, Delirium and Discovery , 
 New York :  HarperCollins . 
 Gibbons ,  M. ,  C.  Limoges ,  H.  Nowotny ,  S. 
 Schwartzman ,  P.  Scott and  M.  Trow 
( 1994 ),  Th e New Production of Knowledge: 
 Th e Dynamics of Science and Research in 
Contemporary Societies ,  London :  Sage . 
 Gibson ,  J. J. ([ 1979 ]  1986 ),  Th e Ecological 
Approach to Visual Perception ,  Abingdon : 
 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 
 Gibson ,  M. ( 2007 ), ‘ Death and Mourning in 
Technologically Mediated Culture ’,  Health 
Sociology Review ,  16 ( 5 ):  415–24 . 
 Gibson ,  W. ( 1984 ),  Neuromancer ,  New York : 
 Ace Books 
 Gibson-Graham ,  J. K. ( 2006 ),  A Postcapitalist 
Politics ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Giddens ,  A. ( 1998 ),  Conversations with Antony 
Giddens:  Making Sense of Modernity , 
 Stanford :  Stanford University Press . 
 Giﬀ ney ,  N. and  M. J.  Hird ( 2008 ),  Queering 
the Non/Human ,  New York and  London : 
 Routledge . 
 Gilbert ,  S. F. ( 2000 ), ‘ Diachronic Biology 
Meets Evo-Devo :  C. H. Waddington’s 
Approach to Evolutionary Developmental 
Biology ’,  American Zoologist ,  40 ( 5 ):  729–37 . 
 Gilbert ,  S. F. ,  J.  Sapp . and  A. I.  Tauber ( 2012 ), 
‘ A Symbiotic View of Life :  We Have Never 
Been Individuals ’,  Th e Quarterly Review of 
Biology ,  87 ( 4 ):  325–41 . 
 Gillespie ,  T. ( 2012 ), ‘ Can an Algorithm Be 
Wrong? ’,  Limn ,  2 ,  http://eschol ar ship.org/uc/
item/0jk9k4hj [accessed  1 March 2016 ].  
 Gillies ,  J. ( 2013 ),   Th e Human Shore ,  Chicago : 
 University of Chicago Press . 
 Gillson ,  L. ( 2015 ),  Biodiversity Conservation 
and Environmental Change:  Using 
Palaeoecology to Manage Dynamic 
Landscapes in the Anthropocene ,  Oxford : 
 Oxford University Press .
CUMULATIVE
Greene ,  B. ( 2011 ),  Th e Hidden Reality: 
 Parallel Universes and the Deep Laws of 
the Cosmos ,  New York :  Random House . 
 Greenwald ,  G. and  E.  MacAskill ( 2013 ), 
‘ NSA  Prism Program Taps in to User 
Data of Apple, Google and Others ’, 
 Guardian ,  7 June ,  http://www.theguard ian.
com/world/2013/jun/06/us- tech-giants- 
nsa-data [accessed  4 May 2016 ]. 
 Greer ,  L. ( 2008 ), ‘ Questioning Digital 
Citizenship :  Th e Answer to Economic and 
Political Inequity? ’,  N.Y.U. Journal of 
Legislation and Public Policy ,  11 ( 651 ): 
 651–69 . 
 Gregg ,  M. and  G.  Seigworth , G. ( 2010 ),  Th e 
Aﬀ ect Th eory Reader ,  Durham ,  NC :  Duke 
University Press . 
 Gregory ,  D. ( 2011 ), ‘ From a View To Kill : 
 Drones and Late Modern War ’,  Th eory, 
Culture and Society ,  28 ( 7–8 ):  188–215 . 
 Grewal ,  I. ( 2014 ), ‘ American Humanitarian 
Citizenship :  Th e “Soft ” Power of Empire ’, 
in  S.  Ponzanesi (ed.),  Gender, 
Globalisation and Violence:  Postcolonial 
Conﬂ ict Zones ,  64–81 ,  London :  Routledge . 
 Griﬃ  ths ,  P. ( 1997 ),  What Emotions Really 
Are ,  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press . 
 Grimaldi ,  N. ( 2011 ),  L’Inhumain ,  Paris : 
 Pressess Universitaries de France . 
 Grosz ,  E. ( 1994 ),  Volatile Bodies:  Towards a 
Corporeal Feminism ,  Bloomington and 
Indianapolis :  Indiana University Press ; 
 Sidney :  Allen & Unwin . 
 Grosz ,  E. ( 2004 ),  Nick of Time:  Politics, 
Evolution and the Untimely ,  Durham ,  NC : 
 Duke University Press . 
 Grosz ,  E. ( 2011 ),  Becoming Undone: 
 Darwinian Reﬂ ections on Life, Politics, and 
Art ,  Durham ,  NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Groys ,  B. ( 2010 ),  Th e Communist Postscript , 
 London :  Verso . 
 Gruen ,  L. and  K.  Weil , K. ( 2012 ), ‘ Animal 
Others – Editors’ Introduction ’,  Hypatia , 
 27 ( 3 ):  477–87 . 
 Grusin ,  R. ( 2015 ), ‘ Radical Mediation ’, 
 Critical Inquiry ,  42 ( 1 ):  124–48 . 
 Gržinić ,  M. and  Š.  Tatlić ( 2014 ), 
 Necropolitics, Racialization, and Global 
Capitalism:  Historicization of Biopolitics 
and Forensics of Politics, Art, and Life , 
 Lanham ,  MD :  Lexington Books . 
 Guattari ,  F.  ([ 1989 ]  2000/2008 ),   Th e Th ree 
Ecologies ,  London and New Brunswick : 
 Th e Athlone Press ;  London :  Continuum . 
 Guattari ,  F. ([ 1989 ]  2013 ), ‘ Architectural 
Enunciation ’, in  Schizoanalytic 
Cartographies ,  231–9 ,  London : 
 Bloomsbury . 
 Guattari ,  F. ([ 1992 ]  1995 ),  Chaosmosis:  An 
Ethico-Aesthetic Paradigm ,  Bloomington 
and Indianapolis :  Indiana University 
Press . 
 Guattari ,  F. ( 1996 ),  Soft  Subversions ,  New 
York :  Semiotext(e) . 
 Guattari ,  F. ( 2011 ),  Th e Machinic 
Unconscious ,  New York :  Semiotext(e) . 
 Guattari ,  F. ( 2012 ),  Schizoanalytic 
Cartographies ,  New York :  Bloomsbury . 
 Guattari ,  F. ( 2013 ), ‘ Qu’est- ce que 
l’écosophie? ’, in  Qu’est- ce que l’écosophie? 
 71–9 ,  Fécamp :  Lignes . 
 Guess ,  C. and  K.  Magee ( 2015 ),  With Animal , 
 Pittsburgh :  Black Lawrence Press . 
 Gunderson ,  L. and  C. S.  Holling (eds) ( 2002 ), 
 Panarchy:  Understanding Transformations 
in Human and Natural Systems , 
 Washington  DC :  Island Press . 
 Gunkel ,  D. ( 2012 ),  Th e Machine Question , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Gunnell ,  T. ( 2007 ),  Masks and Mumming in 
the Nordic Area ,  Uppsala :  Kungl, Gustav 
Adolfs Akademien för Svensk Folkkultur . 
 Habermas ,  J. ( 2003 ),  Th e Future of Human 
Nature ,  Cambridge :  Polity Press . 
 Hadziselimovic ,  N. ,  V.  Vukojevic ,  F.  Peter ,  A. 
 Milnik ,  M.  Fastenrath ,  B. G.  Fenyves ,  P. 
 Hieber ,  P.  Demougin ,  C.  Vogler ,  J. F. 
 Dominique and  A.  Papassotiropoulos 
( 2014 ), ‘ Forgetting is Regulated via 
Musashi- medi ated Translational Control 
of the Arp2/3 Complex ’,  Cell ,  156 ( 6 ): 
 1153–66 . 
 Haﬀ  ,  P. K. ( 2014 ), ‘ Technology as a 
Geological Phenomenon :  Implications for 
Human Well-Being ’, in  C. N.  Waters ,  J. A. 
Zalasiewicz ,  M.  Williams ,  M. A.  Ellis and
CUMULATIVE
Haraway ,  D. ([ 1992 b]  2004 b), ‘ Otherworldly 
Conversations; Terran Topics; Local Terms ’, 
in  Th e Haraway Reader ,  London and New 
York :  Routledge . 
 Haraway ,  D. ( 2008 ),  When Species Meet , 
 Minneapolis and London :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Haraway ,  D. ( 2012 a)  SF, Speculative 
Fabulation and String Figures ,  Berlin : 
 Hatje Cantz . 
 Haraway ,  D. ( 2012 b), ‘ Cosmopolitical 
Critters :  Companion Species,  SF , and 
Staying with the Trouble ’,  John Coﬃ  n 
Memorial Lecture, English Studies in 
asso ci ation with the  IES confer ence 
‘Cosmpolitan Animals’ ,  26–27 October 
2012  ,   London  ,   https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=fMIm0SeRRY4#t=27 [accessed 
 7 February 2017 ]. 
 Haraway ,  D. ( 2013 ), ‘ SF :  Science Fiction, 
Speculative Fabulation, String Figures, So 
Far ’,  Ada:  A Journal of Gender, New Media, 
and Technology ,  3 ,  http://adanew me dia.
org/2013/11/issue3-haraway/ [accessed 
 4 May 2016 ] . 
 Haraway ,  D. ( 2014 ), ‘ SF :  String Figures, 
Multispecies Muddles, Staying with the 
Trouble ’,  public lecture at the University of 
Alberta ,  Edmonton ,  Canada . 
 Haraway  D. ( 2015 a), ‘ Anthropocene, 
Capitalocene, Plantationocene, 
Chthulucene :  Making Kin ’,  Environmental 
Humanities ,  6 :  159–65 . 
 Haraway ,  D. ( 2015 b) ‘ Anthropocene, 
Capitalocene, Chthulhocene .  Donna 
Haraway in conver sa tion with Martha 
Kenney ’, in  H.  Davis and  E.  Turpin (eds), 
 Art in the Anthropocene:  Encounters 
Among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments 
and Epistemologies ,  255–70 ,  London : 
 Open Humanities Press . 
 Haraway ,  D. ( 2016 ),  Staying With Th e 
Trouble:  Making Kin in the Chthulucene 
(Experimental Futures) [e- book edition], 
 Durham ,  NC :  Duke University Press 
Books . 
 Haraway ,  D. and  T.  Goodeve  ( 2000 ),  How 
Like a Leaf ,  New York :  Routledge . 
 Haraway ,  D. and  N.  Lykke ( 2004 ), ‘ Cyborgs, 
Coyotes, and Dogs :  A Kinship of Feminist 
Figurations and Th ere are Always More 
Th ings Going on Th an You Th ought! 
Methodologies as Th inking Technologies ’, 
in  D.  Haraway ,  Th e Haraway Reader , 
 321–341 ,  New York :  Routledge . 
 Haraway ,  D. and  L.  Nakamura , L. ( 2003 ), 
‘ Prospects for a Materialist Informatics : 
 An Interview with Donna Haraway ’, 
 Electronic Book Review ,  30 August ,  http://
www.elec tron ic bookre view.com/thread/
tech no cap it al ism/inter view [accessed 
 1 March 2016 ] . 
 Haraway ,  D. ,  N.  Ishikawa ,  S. F.  Gilbert ,  K.  
 Olwig ,  A. L.  Tsing and  N.  Bubandt ( 2015 ), 
‘ Anthropologists Are Talking – About the 
Anthropocene ’,  Ethnos ,  81 ( 4 ):  1–30 . 
 Harding ,  S. ( 1986 ),  Th e Science Question in 
Feminism ,  Milton Keynes :  Open 
University Press . 
 Harding ,  S. ( 2004 ), ‘ Introduction :  Standpoint 
Th eory as a Site of Political, Philosophic, 
and Scientiﬁ c Debate ’, in   S.  Harding (ed.), 
 Th e Feminist Standpoint Th eory Reader: 
 Intellectual and Political Controversies , 
 1–15 ,  New York :  Routledge . 
 Harding ,  S. ( 2008 ),  Sciences from Below: 
 Feminisms, Postcolonialities, and 
Modernities ,  Durham ,  NC :  Duke 
University Press . 
 Hardt ,  M. ( 2007 ), ‘ Foreword :  What Aﬀ ects 
Are Good For ’, in  P.  Ticineto  Clough and 
 J.  Halley (eds),  Th e Aﬀ ective Turn: 
 Th eorizing the Social  ,  ix–xiii ,   Durham , 
 NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Hardt ,  M. and  A.  Negri ( 2000 ),  Empire , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Hardt ,  M. and  A.  Negri ( 2004 ),  Multitude: 
 War and Democracy in the Age of Empire , 
 London :  Penguin . 
 Hardt ,  M. and  A.  Negri ( 2009 ), 
 Commonwealth ,  Cambridge ,  MA : 
 Harvard University Press . 
 Harel ,  D. and  Rosner ,  R. ( 1992 ),  Algorithmics , 
 Reading :  Addison-Wesley . 
 Haritaworn ,  J. ,  A.  Kuntsman and  S.  Posocco 
( 2014 ), ‘ Introduction ’, in  J.  Haritaworn ,
CUMULATIVE
Heidegger ,  M. ( 1971 ), ‘ Th e Th ing ’, in  Poetry, 
Language, Th ought , trans.  Albert 
 Hofstadter ,  New York :  Perennial Classics . 
 Heidegger ,  M. ([ 1927 ]  1996 ),  Being and 
Time , trans.  J.  Stambaugh ,  New York : 
 SUNY  Press . 
 Heidegger ,  M. ([ 1954 ]  1977 ), ‘ Th e Question 
Concerning Technology ’, in  Basic 
Writings , ed.  D. F.  Krell ,  288–318 ,  New 
York :  Harper & Row ; (also  311–41 ,  New 
York :  HarperCollins  1993 ), also in  Th e 
Question Concerning Technology and 
Other Essays , ed.  W.   Lovitt ( 1977 ),  New 
York and London :  Garland . 
 Heidegger ,  M. ( 1998 ), ‘ Letter on 
“Humanism”  ’, in  W.  McNeill (ed.), 
 Pathmarks ,  New York :  Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Heidegger ,  M. ( 2002 ), ‘ Th e Age of the World 
Picture ’, in  J.  Young and  K.  Haynes (eds), 
 Oﬀ  the Beaten Track ,  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press . 
  Heidegger ,  M. ( 2012 ), ‘ Positionality ’, in 
 Bremen and Freiburg Lectures:  Insight Into 
What Is and Basic Principles of Th inking , 
 23–43 ,  Bloomington :  Indiana University 
Press . 
  Heinz ,  K. ( 1983 ),  Entwurf einer Philosophie 
des Wir:  Schule des altern at iven Denkens , 
 Bochum :  Germinal Verlag . 
  Heise ,  U. K. ( 2008 ),  Sense of Place and Sense 
of Planet:  Th e Environmental Imagination 
of the Global ,  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press . 
  Heise ,  U. K. ( 2011 ), ‘ Th e Posthuman Turn : 
 Rewriting Species in Recent American 
Literature ’, in  C. F.  Levander and  R. S. 
 Levine (eds),  A Companion to American 
Literary Studies ,  454–69 ,  Oxford :  Wiley 
Blackwell . 
 Hemmings ,  C. ( 2011 ),  Why Stories Matter: 
 Th e Political Grammar of Feminist Th eory , 
 Durham ,  NC and  London :  Duke 
University Press . 
 Henry ,  M. ( 2015 ), ‘ Parades, Parties and Pests : 
 Contradictions of Everyday Life in 
Peacekeeping Economies ’,  Journal of 
Intervention and Statebuilding ,  1–19 . 
 Herbrechter ,  S. ( 2011 ), ‘ Shakespeare Ever 
Aft er :  Posthumanism and Shakespeare ’, in 
 A.  Höfele and  S.  Laqué (eds), 
 Humankinds:  Th e Renaissance and Its 
Anthropologies ,  261–78 ,  Berlin and New 
York :  De Gruyter . 
 Herbrechter ,  S. ( 2013 ),  Posthumanism:  A 
Critical Analysis ,  London :  Bloomsbury . 
 Herbrechter ,  S. and  I.  Callus (eds) ( 2005 ), 
 Cy-Borges:  Memories of the Posthuman in 
the Work of Jorge Luis Borges ,  Lewisburg : 
 Bucknell University Press . 
 Herbrechter ,  S. and  I.  Callus (eds) ( 2012 ), 
 Posthumanist Shakespeares ,  Houndmills : 
 Palgrave Macmillan . 
 Herrera ,  P. ( 2008 ), ‘ Nuyoriqueñas in the 
House :  Performing Identity Th rough Hip 
Hop, Poetry, and Th eater ’,  unpub lished PhD 
disser ta tion ,  City University of New York . 
 Hertz ,  G. and   J.  Parikka  ( 2012 ), ‘ Zombie 
Media :  Circuit Bending Media 
Archaeology into an Art Method ’, 
 Leonardo ,  45 ( 5 ):  424–30 . 
 Hewlett-Packard ( 2015 ), ‘ Ce NSE ’,  http://
www8.hp.com/us/en/hp- inform a tion/
envir on ment/cense.html [accessed  08 
March 2016 ]. 
 Hickman ,  L. ( 2013 ), ‘ How Algorithms Rule 
the World ’,  Guardian ,  1 July ,  http://www.
theguard ian.com/science/2013/jul/01/
how- algorithms-rule- world-nsa [accessed 
 16 November 2015 ] . 
 Higgins ,  D. ([ 1965 ]  1966 ), ‘ Intermedia ’, 
 Something Else Newsletter  1 ( 1 ),  New York : 
 Something Else Press . 
 Higgins ,  D. ( 1984 ),  Horizons, the Poetics and 
Th eory of the Intermedia ,  Carbondale : 
 Southern Illinois University Press . 
 Hill ,  G. L. and  S.  McCall ( 2015 ), 
‘ Introduction ’ in  Th e Land We Are , 
 Winnipeg :  ARP Books . 
 Hilsum ,  L. ( 1994 ), ‘ Rwanda :  Settling Scores ’, 
 Africa Report ,  39 ( 3 ):  13–17 . 
 Hird ,  M. J. ( 2006 ), ‘ Animal Transex ’, 
 Australian Feminist Studies ,  21 ( 49 ):  35–50 . 
 Hird ,  M. J. and  C.  Roberts (eds) ( 2011 ), 
‘ Feminism Th eorises the Nonhuman ’, 
 Feminist Th eory ,  12 ( 2 ):  109–17 .
CUMULATIVE
Ikoniadou ,  E. ( 2014 ),  Th e Rhythmic Event: 
 Art, Media, and the Sonic ,  Cambridge , 
 MA  :  MIT Press . 
 Ilyenkov ,  E. ( 1977 ), ‘ Th e Problem of the 
General in Dialectics ’, in  Dialectial Logic: 
 Essays in Th eory and History , trans.  H. 
 Campbell  Creighton ,  Moscow :  Progress 
Publishers , avail able at  https://www.
marx ists.org/archive/ilyen kov/works/
essays/essay11.htm [accessed  8 January 
2016 ].  
  Ilyenkov ,  E. ( 1991 ), ‘ Cosmology of Mind ’, in 
 Philosophy and Culture ,  415–37 ,  Moscow : 
 Politizdat . 
 Ingold ,  T. ( 2000 ),  Th e Perception of the 
Environment:  Essays on Livelihood, 
Dwelling and Skill ,  Abingdon and New 
York :  Routledge . 
 International Monetary Fund ( 2006 ), ‘ Global 
Financial System Resilience in the Face of 
Cyclical Challenges ’, in  Global Financial 
Stability Report:  Market Developments 
and Issues ,  London :  IMF . 
 Introna ,  L. ( 2016 ), ‘ Algorithms, Governance, 
and Governmentality :  On Governing 
Academic Writing ’,   Science, Technology & 
Human Values ,  41 ( 1 ):  17–49 . 
 Introna ,  L. and  D.  Wood ( 2004 ), ‘ Picturing 
Algorithmic Surveillance :  Th e Politics of 
Facial Recognition Systems ’,  Surveillance 
& Society ,  2 ( 2–3 ):  177–79 . 
 Invisible Committee, Th e ( 2015 ),  To Our 
Friends ,  Los Angeles :  Semiotext€ . 
 Iovino ,  S. ( 2015 ), ‘ Th e Living Diﬀ ractions of 
Matter and Text :  Narrative Agency, 
Strategic Anthropomorphism, and How 
Interpretation Works ’,  Anglia ,  133 ( 1 ): 
 69–87 . 
  Iovino ,  S. ( 2016 ),  Ecocriticism and Italy: 
 Ecology, Resistance, and Liberation , 
 London :  Bloomsbury . 
 Iovino ,  S. and  S.  Oppermann ( 2012 a), 
‘ Material Ecocriticism :  Materiality, 
Agency, and Models of Narrativity ’, 
 Ecozon@ ,  3 ( 1 ):  75–91 . 
 Iovino ,  S. and  S.  Oppermann ( 2012 b), 
‘ Th eorizing Material Ecocriticism :  A 
Diptych ’,  Interdisciplinary Studies in 
Literature and Environment ,  19 ( 3 ): 
 448–75 . 
 Iovino ,  S. and  S.  Oppermann ( 2014 a) (eds), 
 Material Ecocriticism ,  Bloomington : 
 Indiana University Press . 
 Iovino ,  S. and  S.  Oppermann ( 2014 b), 
‘ Introduction :  Stories Come to Matter ’, in 
 S.  Iovino and  S.  Oppermann (eds), 
 Material Ecocriticism ,  1–17 ,  Bloomington : 
 Indiana University Press . 
 Irigaray ,  L. ( 1985 a),  Speculum of the Other 
Woman ,  Ithaca :  Cornell University 
Press . 
 Irigaray ,  L. ( 1985 b),  Th is Sex Which Is Not 
One ,  Ithaca :  Cornell University Press . 
 Irigaray ,  L. ( 1992 ),  Elemental Passions ,  New 
York :  Routledge . 
 Irigaray ,  L. ( 1993 ),  An Ethics of Sexual 
Diﬀ erence ,  New York :  Cornell University 
Press . 
 Irigaray ,  L. ( 1994 ), ‘ Equal to Whom? ’ in  N. 
 Schor and  E.  Weed (eds),  Th e Essential 
Diﬀ erence ,  Bloomington :  Indiana 
University Press . 
 Irni ,  S. ( 2013 a), ‘ Th e Politics of Materiality : 
 Aﬀ ective Encounters in a 
Transdisciplinary Debate ’,  European 
Journal of Women’s Studies ,  20 ( 4 ):  347–60 . 
 Irni ,  S. ( 2013 b), ‘ Sex, Power and Ontology : 
 Exploring the Performativity of 
Hormones ’,  NORA:  Nordic Journal of 
Women’s Studies ,  21 ( 1 ):  41–56 . 
 Ishiguro ,  K ( 2006 ),  Never Let Me Go ,  New 
York :  Alfred A. Knopf . 
 Isin ,  E. F. and  G.M.  Nielsen (eds) ( 2008 ),  Acts 
of Citizenship ,  London and New York :  Zed 
Books . 
 Ito ,  J. ([ 1998–99 ]  2013 ),  Uzumaki ,  San 
Francisco :  VIZ Media  LLC . 
 Jablonka ,  E. and  M. J.  Lamb ( 2005 ),  Evolution 
in Four Dimensions:  Genetic, Epigenetic, 
Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in the 
History of Life ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT  
Press . 
 Jabri ,  V. ( 1996 ),  Discourses on Violence: 
 Conﬂ ict Analysis Reconsidered , 
 Manchester and New York :  Manchester 
University Press .
CUMULATIVE
Kant ,  I ( 1800 ),  Logik:  Ein Handbuch zu 
Vorlesungen ,  Königsberg :  Friedrich 
Nicolovius ;  Akademie-Ausgabe, Bd. 9 , 
 1–150 , A 17. 
 Kant ,  I. ( 1970 ), ‘ Perpetual Peace :  A 
Philosophical Sketch ’, in  H.  Reiss and  H. S. 
 Nesbit (eds),  Kant’s Political Writings , 
 93–130 ,  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Kant ,  I. ([ 1970 ]  1991 ), ‘ An Answer to the 
Question :  What is Enlightenment? ’, in 
 Kant:  Political Writings , ed.  H. S.  Reiss , 
 2nd ed.,  54–60 ,  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Kant ,  I. ( 2006 ), ‘ Idea for a Universal History 
from a Cosmopolitan Perspective ’, in 
 Toward Perpetual Peace and Other 
Writings on Politics, Peace, and History , ed. 
 P.  Kleingeld and  D. L.  Colclasure ,  3–17 , 
  New Haven  :  Yale University Press  . 
 Karatzogianni ,  A. and  M.  Schandorf ( 2012 ), 
‘ Surﬁ ng the Revolutionary Wave 2010–12 : 
 A Social Th eory of Agency, Resistance, 
and Orders of Dissent in Contemporary 
Social Movements ’, unpub lished, avail able 
online,   https://works.bepress.com/
athina_karatzo gi anni/16/ [accessed  28 
November 2016 ]. 
 Karppi ,  T. ( 2015 ), ‘ Happy Accidents : 
 Facebook and the Value of Aﬀ ect ’, in  K. 
 Hillis ,  S.  Paasonen and  M.  Petit (eds), 
 Networked Aﬀ ect ,  221–34 ,  Cambridge , 
 MA  :  MIT Press . 
 Karppi ,  T. and  K.  Crawford ( 2016 ), ‘ Social 
Media, Financial Algorithms and the 
Hack Crash ’,  Th eory, Culture & Society , 
 33 ( 1 ):  73–92 . 
 Keen ,  A. ( 2007 ),  Th e Cult of the Amateur: 
 How the Democratization of the Digital 
World is Assaulting Our Economy, Our 
Culture, and Our Value ,  New York : 
 Doubleday Currency . 
 Keenan ,  T. and  E.  Weizman ( 2012 ),  Mengele’s 
Skull:  Th e Advent of a Forensic Aesthetics , 
 Berlin :  Sternberg Press . 
 Kelley ,  L. ( 2014 ), ‘ Tranimals ’,  TSQ: 
 Transgender Studies Quarterly ,  1 ( 1–2 ): 
 226–8 . 
 Kelly ,  K. ( 2009 ), ‘ Th e New Socialism :  Global 
Collectivist Society Is Coming Online ’, 
 Wired Magazine ,  17 : 6 ,  22 May ,  https://
archive.wired.com/culture/
culturereviews/magazine/17–06/nep_
news o cial ism [accessed  13 March 2016 ]. 
 Kember ,  S. ( 2013 ), ‘ Gender Estimation in 
Face Recognition Technology :  How Smart 
Algorithms Learn to Discriminate ’,  Media 
Fields Journal:  Critical Explorations in 
Media and Space ,  12 ,  30 November ,  http://
www.medi aﬁ eld s journal.org/gender- 
estimation-in- face-reco/2013/11/30/
gender- estimation-in- face-recognition- 
technology-how- smart-a.html [accessed 
 8 March 2016 ] . 
 Kember ,  S. and  J.  Zylinska ( 2012 ),  Life aft er 
Media:  Mediation as a Vital Process , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Kennedy ,  J. E. ( 2005 ), ‘ Personality and 
Motivation to Believe, Misbelieve, and 
Disbelieve in Paranormal Phenomena ’, 
 Journal of Parapsychology ,  69 ( 2 ):  263–92 . 
 Kessler ,  F. E. and  M. T.  Schäfer ( 2009 ), 
‘ Navigating YouTube :  Constituting a 
Hybrid Information Management System ’, 
in  P.  Snickars and  P.  Vonderau (eds),  Th e 
YouTube Reader ,  275–91 ,  Stockholm : 
 National Library of Sweden . 
 Kier ,  B. ( 2010 ), ‘ Interdependent Ecological 
Transsex :
CUMULATIVE
of the Philippines ’,  East Asian Science, 
Technology and Society:  An International 
Journal ,  7 ( 4 ),  557–78 . 
 Kosmann-Schwarzback ,  Y. ( 2011 ),  Th e 
Noether Th eorems:  Invariance and 
Conservation Laws in the Twentieth 
Century ,  New York :  Springer . 
 Kostakis ,  V. and  M.  Bauwens ( 2014 ),  Network 
Society and Future Scenarios for a 
Collaborative Economy ,  Basingstoke : 
 Palgrave Macmillan . 
 Kostakis ,  V. ,  A.  Roos and  M.  Bauwens ( 2015 ), 
‘ Towards a Political Ecology of the Digital 
Economy :  Socio-Environmental 
Implications of Two Competing Value 
Models ’,  Environmental Innovation and 
Societal Transitions ,  18 :  82–100 . 
 Kostakis ,  V. ,  K. ,  Latouﬁ s ,  M.  Liarokapis , and 
 M.  Bauwens , ( 2017 ), ‘ Th e Convergence of 
Digital Commons with Local 
Manufacturing from a Degrowth 
Perspective: Two Illustrative Cases’. 
 Journal of Cleaner Production .  
 Kramer ,  A. D. I. ,  J. E.  Guillory and  J. T.  
 Hancock , ( 2014 ), ‘ Experimental Evidence 
of Massive-Scale Emotional Contagion 
through Social Networks ’,  Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America ,  111 ( 24 ):  8788–90 . 
 Krauss ,  R. ( 1972 ), ‘ A View of Modernism ’, 
 Artforum ,  September :  48–51 . 
 Krauss ,  R. ,  A.  Michelson ,  G.  Baker ,  Y.A.  Bois , 
 B. H. D.  Buchloh ,  L.  Dickerman ,  D.  Fore , 
 H.  Foster ,  D.  Hollier ,  D.  Joselit ,  C. 
 Lambert-Beatty ,  M.  Nixon and  M.  Turvey 
( 2009 ), ‘ Questionnaire on the 
Contemporary ’,  October ,  130 :  1–124 . 
 Kristeva ,  J. ( 1982 ),  Powers of Horror , trans  L. 
 Roudiez ,  New York :  Columbia University 
Press . 
 Kristeva ,  J. ( 1984 ),  Revolution in Poetic 
Language ,  New York :  Columbia 
University Press . 
 Kroløkke ,  C. ,  L.  Myong ,  S. W.  Adrian and  T. 
 Tjørnhøj-Th omsen (eds) ( 2015 ),  Critical 
Kinship Studies ,  London :  Rowman & 
Littleﬁ eld . 
 Kunzel ,  R. ( 2014 ), ‘ Book Review :  Th e 
Flourishing of Transgender Studies ’,  TSQ: 
 Transgender Studies Quarterly ,  1 ( 1–2 ): 
 285–97 . 
 Kurzweil ,  R. ( 2005 ),   Th e Singularity is Near: 
 When Humans Transcend Biology ,  New 
York :  Viking . 
 Kwinter ,  S. ( 2014 ), ‘ Neuroecology :
CUMULATIVE
Lauro ,  S. J. and  K.  Embry ( 2008 ), ‘ A Zombie 
Manifesto :  Th e Nonhuman Condition in 
the Era of Advanced Capitalism ’, 
 Boundary 2 ,  35 ( 1 ):  85–108 . 
 Law ,  J. ( 2015 ), ‘ What’s Wrong with a 
One-World World? ’  Distinktion:  Journal 
of Social Th eory ,  16 ( 1 ):  126–39 . 
 Lazarus ,  N. ( 2011 ), ‘ What Postcolonial 
Th eory Doesn’t Say ’,  Race & Class ,  53 ( 1 ): 
 3–27 . 
 Lazzarato ,  M. ( 1996 ), ‘ Immaterial Labor ’, in 
 M.  Hardt and  P.  Virno (eds),  Radical 
Th ought in Italy:  A Potential Politics , 
 133–47 ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Lazzarato ,  M. ( 2002 ),  Puissances de 
l’invention:  La psycho lo gie économique de 
Gabriel Tarde contre l’économie poli tique , 
  Paris :  Les Empécheurs de enser en rond . 
 Lazzarato ,  M. ( 2014 ),  Signs and Machines: 
 Capitalism and the Production of 
Subjectivity ,  Los Angeles :  Semoitext(e) . 
 LeBel ,  S. ( 2012 ), ‘ Wasting the 
Future :  Th e Technological Sublime, 
Communications Technologies, and 
E-waste ’,  commu nic a tion +1 ,  1 ( 7 ):  1–19 , 
 http://schol ar works.umass.edu/cpo/vol1/
iss1/7 [accessed  1 December 2015 ] . 
 Lechner ,  M. ( 2015 ), ‘ Preamble ’, in  N.  Maigret 
and  M.  Roszkowska (eds),  Th e Pirate 
Book ,  13–21 ,  Ljubljana :  Aksioma – 
Institute for Contemporary Art . 
 Lee ,  R. C. ( 2014 ),  Th e Exquisite Corpse of 
Asian America:  Biopolitics, Biosociality, 
and Posthuman Ecologies ,  New York :  New 
York University Press . 
 Leibniz ,  G. W. ( 1988 ),  Discourse on 
Metaphysics and Related Writings ,  New 
York :  St. Martin’s Press . 
 Leibniz ,  G. W. ([ 1710 ]  2010 ), ‘ Essays of 
Th eodicy on the Goodness of God, the 
Freedom of Man and the Origin of Evil ’, 
in  Th eodicy ,  New York :  Cosimo Classics . 
 Leibniz ,  G. W. ( 1989 a) ‘ Principles of Nature 
and Grace, Based on Reason (1714) ’, in 
 Philosophical Essays , ed.  R.  Ariew and 
 D.  Graber ,  206–13 ,  Indianapolis :  Hackett 
Publishing Company . 
 Leibniz ,  G. W. ( 1989 b), ‘ Discourse on 
Metaphysics (1686) ’, in  Philosophical 
Essays , ed.  R.  Ariew and  D.  Graber ,  35–68 , 
 Indianapolis :  Hackett Publishing 
Company . 
 Lemke ,  T. ( 2005 ), ‘ “A Zone of Indistinction” 
– A Critique of Giorgio Agamben’s 
Concept of Biopolitics ’,  Outlines:  Critical 
Practice Studies ,  7 ( 1 ):  3–13 . 
 Lenglet ,  M. ( 2011 ), ‘ Conﬂ icting Codes and 
Codings :  How Algorithmic Trading Is 
Reshaping Financial Regulation ’,  Th eory, 
Culture & Society ,  28 ( 6 ):  44–66 . 
 Lenglet ,  M. ( 2013 ), ‘ Algorithms and the 
Manufacture of Financial Reality ’, in  P. 
 Harvey ,  E.  Casella ,  G.  Evans ,  H.  Knox ,  C. 
 McLean ,  E.  Silva ,  N.  Th oburn and  K. 
 Woodward (eds),  Objects and Materials:  A 
Routledge Companion ,  312–22 ,  London : 
 Routledge . 
 Lenz Taguchi ,  H. ( 2013 ), ‘ Images of Th inking 
in Feminist Materialisms :  Ontological 
Divergences and the Production of 
Researcher Subjectivities ’,  International 
Journal of Qualitative Studies in 
Education: QSE ,  26 ( 6 ):  706–16 . 
 Leroi-Gourhan ,  A. ( 1945 ),  Milieu et 
Techniques ,  Paris :  Albin Michel . 
 Leslie ,  J.  ( 1998 ),  End of the World:  Th e 
Science and Ethics of Human Extinction , 
 London :  Routledge . 
 Lessig ,  L. ( 2002 ),  Th e Future of Ideas:  Th e 
Fate of the Commons in a Connected 
World ,  New York :  Vintage . 
 Levant ,  A. and  V.  Oittinen ( 2014 ),  Dialectics 
of the Ideal:  Evald Ilyenkov and Creative 
Soviet Marxism ,  Boston and Leiden :  Brill . 
 Lévi-Strauss ,  C. ([ 1949 ]  1981 ), ‘ Die archa-
ische Illusion ’, in  Die element aren 
Strukturen der Verwandtschaft  , trans.  E. 
 Moldenhauer ,  159–201 ,  Frankfurt am 
Main :  Suhrkamp . 
 Levy ,  S. ( 1984 ),  Hackers:  Heroes of the 
Computer Revolution ,  New York :  Dell/
Doubleday . 
 Levy-Leblond ,  J.-M. and  F.  Balibar ( 1990 ), 
 Quantics:  Rudiments of Quantum Physics , 
 Amsterdam :  North Holland .
CUMULATIVE
Luciano ,  D. and  M. Y.  Chen ( 2015 ), ‘ Has the 
Queer Ever Been Human? ’,  GLQ: A 
Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies , 
 Special Issue on ‘Queer Inhumanisms’ , 
 21 ( 2–3 ):  183–207 . 
 Luhmann ,  N. ( 1995 ),  Social Systems , 
 Stanford :  Stanford University Press . 
  Luhmann ,  N. ( 2002 ),  Th eories of Distinction:   
 Redescribing the Descriptions of Modernity , 
 Stanford :  Stanford University Press . 
 Lukacs ,  G. ( 1967 ),  History and Class 
Consciousness ,  London :  Merlin Press . 
 Lukacs ,  G. ( 1977 ), ‘ Bolshevism as a Moral 
Problem ’,  Social Research ,  44 :  416–24 . 
 Lykke ,  N. ( 2010 ),  Feminist Studies:  A Guide 
to Intersectional Th eory, Methodology and 
Writing ,  New York and London : 
 Routledge . 
 Lykke ,  N. ( 2011 ), ‘ Th is Discipline Which Is 
Not One :  Feminist Studies as a Post-
Discipline ’, in  R.  Buikema ,  G.  Griﬃ  n and 
 N.  Lykke (eds),  Th eories and 
Methodologies in Postgraduate Feminist 
Research:  Researching Diﬀ erently ,  137–51 , 
 New York :  Routledge . 
 Lyotard ,  J. F. ([ 1979 ]  1984 ),  Th e Postmodern 
Condition:  A Report on Knowledge , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Lyotard ,  J. F. ( 1988 ),  Th e Diﬀ erend:  Phrases in 
Dispute ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Lyotard ,  J. F. ( 1991 ),  Th e Inhuman:  Reﬂ ections 
on Time ,  Cambridge :  Polity Press . 
 Lyotard ,  J. ( 1992 a),  Het onmenselijke , trans.  I. 
 van der  Burg ,  F.  van  Peperstraten and  H. 
 van der  Waal ,  Kampen :  Kok Agora . 
 Lyotard ,  J. F. ( 1992 b),  Th e Postmodern 
Explained to Children:  Correspondence 
1982–1985 ,  Sydney :  Power Publications . 
 Maas ,  W. and  M.  Pasquinelli ( 2009 ), ‘ Th e 
City Devouring Itself :  Urbanibalism in 
Times of World Wars, Insurgent 
Communes and Biopolitical Sieges ’,     Open  , 
 18 :  2030  :  Wow Zone Amsterdam , 
 Rotterdam :  NA i . 
 Maas ,  W. and  M.  Pasquinelli ( 2013 ), 
‘ Manifesto of Urban Cannibalism (Berlin 
Declaration) ’,  Architectural Review Asia 
Paciﬁ c ( New reissue:  DIS magazine ,  New 
York ,  October 2014 ) . 
 MacCormack ,  P. ( 2012 ),  Posthuman Ethics , 
 Aldershot :  Ashgate . 
 MacCormack ,  P. ( 2013 ), ‘ Gracious Pedagogy ’, 
 Journal of Curriculum and Pedagogy , 
 10 ( 1 ):  13–17 . 
 MacCormack ,  P. (ed.) ( 2014 ),  Th e Animal 
Catalyst:  Towards Ahuman Th eory , 
 London :  Bloomsbury . 
 MacDowell ,  J. ( 2012 ), ‘ Wes Anderson, Tone 
and the Quirky Sensibility ’,  New Review 
of Film and Television Studies ,  10 ( 1 ): 
 6–27 . 
 Macfarlane ,  R. ( 2016 ), ‘ Generation 
Anthropocene :  How Humans have 
Altered the Planet Forever ’,  Guardian , 
 1 April ,  https://www.theguard ian.com/
books/2016/apr/01/gener a tion- 
anthropocene-altered- planet-for- ever 
[accessed  26 May 2016 ] . 
 Maciel ,  C. and  V. C.  Carvalho  Pereira (eds) 
( 2013 ),  Digital Legacy and Interaction , 
 New York :  Springer . 
 Maclagan ,  M. (ed.) ( 2012 ),  Sensible Politics: 
 Th e Visual Culture of Nongovernmental 
Activism ,  New York :  Zone Books . 
 Macpherson ,  C. B. ( 1962 ),  Th e Political 
Th eory of Possessive Individualism:  Hobbes 
to Locke ,  Oxford :  Clarendon Press . 
 Magnani ,  L. ( 2009 ),  Abductive Cognition:  Th e 
Epistemological and Eco- cognit ive 
Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning , 
 Berlin :  Springer Verlag . 
 Malabou ,  C. ( 2004 ),   Th e Future of Hegel: 
 Plasticity, Temporality, and Dialectic ,  New 
York :  Routledge . 
 Malabou ,  C. ( 2007 ), ‘ Plasticity and Elasticity 
in Freud’s “Beyond the Pleasure Principle ”, 
 Diacritics ,  37 ( 4 ):  78–85 . 
 Malabou ,  C. ( 2008 ),   What Should We Do 
With Our Brain?  New York :  Fordham 
University Press . 
 Malabou ,  C. ( 2009 a),   Plasticity at the Dusk of 
Writing:  Dialectic, Destruction, 
Deconstruction ,  New York :  Columbia 
University Press .
CUMULATIVE
Marx ,  K. ( 1959 ),  Capital Volume III:  Th e 
Process of Capitalist Production as a 
Whole , Institute of Marxism and 
Leninism of  USSR , from the online 
version of the Marxist Internet Archive, 
 https://www.marx ists.org/archive/marx/
works/1894-c3 [accessed  8 March 
2016 ]. 
 Marx ,  K. ( 1973 ),  Grundrisse:  Outlines of the 
Critique of Political Economy ,  New York : 
 Penguin Books . 
 Marx ,  K. ( 2002 ),  Th eses on Feuerbach , 
Marxists Internet Archive:  http://www.
marx ists.org/archive/marx/works/1845/
theses/ [accessed  8 March 2016 ]. 
 Marx ,  K. ( 2007 ),  Economic and Philosophic 
Manuscripts of 1844 ,  New York :  Dover 
Publications ; Marxists Internet Archive, 
 https://www.marx ists.org/archive/marx/
works/down load/pdf/Economic-
Philosophic-Manuscripts–1844.pdf 
[accessed  8 March 2016 ]. 
 Massumi ,  B. ( 2002 ),  Parables for the Virtual: 
 Movement, Aﬀ ect, Sensation ,  Durham , 
 NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Massumi ,  B. ( 2009 ), ‘ National Enterprise 
Emergency :  Steps Toward an Ecology of 
Powers ’,  Th eory, Culture & Society ,  26 ( 6 ): 
 153–85 . 
 Massumi ,  B. ( 2011 ),  Semblance and Event: 
 Activist Philosophy and the Occurrent Arts , 
 Cambridge ,  MA and  London :  MIT Press . 
 Massumi ,  B. ( 2012 ), ‘ “Technical Mentality” 
Revisited :  Brian Massumi on Gilbert 
Simondon ’, in  A. De  Boever ,  A.  Murray , 
 J.  Roﬀ e and  A.  Woodward (eds),  Gilbert 
Simondon:  Being and Technology , 
 Edinburgh :  Edinburgh University Press . 
 Massumi ,  B. ( 2015 a),  Th e Politics of Aﬀ ect , 
 Cambridge :  Polity Press . 
 Massumi ,  B. ( 2015 b), ‘ Undigesting Deleuze ’, 
 Los Angeles Review of Books ,  8 November , 
 https://lare v iewofb ooks.org/essay/
undi gest ing- deleuze [accessed  15 March 
2016 ] . 
 Massumi ,  B. ( 2015 c),  Ontopower:  War, Powers, 
and the State of Perception ,  Durham ,  NC  
and  London :  Duke University Press . 
 Massumi ,  B. and  J.  McKim ( 2009 ), ‘ “Of 
Microperception and Micropolitics” :  An 
Interview with Brian Massumi, 15 August 
2008 ,’     Inﬂ extions:  A Journal for Research-
Creation ,  3 :  183–275 ,  http://www.senselab.
ca/inﬂ ex ions/volume_3/node_i3/
massumi_en_inﬂ ex ions_vol03.html 
[accessed  06 April 2017 ] . 
 Matsutake Worlds Research Group ( 2009 ), ‘ A 
New Form of Collaboration in Cultural 
Anthropology :  Matsutake Worlds ’, 
 American Ethnologist ,  36 ( 2 ):  380–403 . 
 Mattila ,  H. R. ( 2006 ),  Intelligent Textiles and 
Clothing ,  Boca Raton :  CRC Press . 
 Maturana ,  H. R. and  F. J.  Varela ( 1980 ), 
 Autopoiesis and Cognition:  Th e 
Realization of the Living ,  Boston :  Riedel . 
 Maur ,  R. (der),  J.  Staal and  D.  Dirik (eds) 
( 2013 ),  New World Academy, Reader #5: 
Stateless Democracy ,  Utrecht :  BAK , basis 
voor actuele kunst . 
 Maxwell ,  R. and  T.  Miller , T. (2012),  Greening 
the Media ,  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press . 
 May ,  R. ,  S.  Levin and  G.  Sugihara , G. ( 2008 ), 
‘ Complex Systems :  Ecology for Bankers ’ , 
 Nature ,  451 :  893–95 . 
 Mazurov ,  N. ( 2015 ), ‘ Strategies for Unbridled 
Data Dissemination :  An Emergency 
Operations Manual ’, unpub lished  PhD 
thesis ,  Goldsmiths, University of London , 
 https://archive.org/details/
StrategiesForUnbridledData
DisseminationAnEmergency
OperationsManual [accessed
  24 December 2015 ]. 
 Mbembe ,  A. ( 2001 ),  On the Postcolony , 
 Berkley and Los Angeles :  University of 
California Press . 
 Mbembe ,  A. ( 2003 ), ‘ Necropolitics ’,  Public 
Culture ,  15 ( 1 ):  11–40 . 
 Mbembe ,  A. ( 2015 ),  Kritik der Schwarzen 
Vernunft  , trans.  M.  Bischoﬀ  ,  Frankfurt am 
Main :  Suhrkamp/Insel . 
 McCance ,  D. ( 1996 ),  Posts:  Readdressing the 
Ethical ,  New York :  SUNY Press . 
 McCarthy ,  C. ( 2009 ),  Th e Road ,  New York : 
 Vintage .
CUMULATIVE
P.  Kockelkoren ,  D.  Kerckhoﬀ s and  F. 
 Wiersum (eds),  Hacking Habitat:  Art, 
Technology and Social Change ,  20–35 , 
 Rotterdam :  nai010 publish ers . 
 Milburn ,  C. ( 2014 ), ‘ Posthumanism ’, in  R. 
 Latham (ed.),  Th e Oxford Handbook of 
Science Fiction ,  524–37 ,  New York :  Oxford 
University Press . 
 Milne ,  J. G. ( 1945 ), ‘ Th e Economic Policy of 
Solon ’,  Hesperia:  Th e Journal of the 
American School of Classical Studies at 
Athens ,  14 ( 3 ):  230–45 . 
 Milne ,  S. ( 2015 ),  Th e Revenge of History:  
 Th e Battle for the 21st Century ,  London : 
 Verso . 
  Milstein ,  T. and  C.  Kroløkke ( 2012 ), 
‘ Transcorporeal Tourism :  Whales, Fetuses, 
and the Rupturing and Reinscribing of 
Cultural Constraints ’,  Environmental 
Communication:  A Journal of Nature and 
Culture ,  6 ( 1 ):  82–100 . 
 Minh- ha ,  T. T. ( 1986/7 ), ‘ She the 
Inappropriate/d Other ’, in  Discourse 8 , 
 Center for Twentieth Century Studies , 
 University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee . 
 Minh- ha ,  T. T. ( 1989 ),  Woman, Native, Other: 
 Writing Postcoloniality and Feminism , 
 Bloomington :  Indiana University Press . 
 Minh- ha ,  T. T. ( 2012 ),  Th e Digital Film Event , 
 London :  Routledge . 
 Minnesota University Press ( 2017 ), 
 Posthumanities series page,  https://www.
upress.umn.edu/book- divi sion/series/
posthu man it ies [accessed  13 April 2017 ]. 
 Minsky ,  M. and  S. A.  Papert ( 1987 ), 
 Perceptrons:  An Introduction to 
Computational Geometry ,  Cambridge , 
 MA  :  MIT Press . 
  Minteer ,  B. A. ( 2015 ), ‘ Th e Perils of De-
Extinction ,’  Minding Nature ,  8 ( 1 ):  11–17 . 
 Mirzoeﬀ  ,  N. ( 2014 ), ‘ Visualizing the 
Anthropocene ’,  Public Culture ,  26 ( 2 ): 
 213–32 . 
 Mitropoulos ,  A. ( 2012 ),  Contract and 
Contagion:  From Biopolitics to Oikonomia , 
 New York :  Minor Compositions . 
 Mohanty ,  C. T. ( 1984 ), ‘ Under Western Eyes : 
 Feminist Scholarship and Colonial 
Discourses ’,  bound ary 2 ,  12/13 ( 3/1 ): 
 333–58 . 
 Moinuddin ,  A. et al. ( 2013 ), ‘ Continental- 
scale Temperature Variability During the 
Past Two Millennia ,  Nature Geoscience ,
  6 :  339–46 . 
 Mol ,  A. ( 2002 ),  Th e Body Multiple:  Ontology 
in Medical Practice ,  Durham ,  NC :  Duke 
University Press . 
 Molina ,  L. ( 1998 ), ‘ Solon and the Evolution 
of the Athenian Agrarian Economy ’,  
 Pomoerium ,  3 ,  http://pomo erium.eu/
pomoer/pomoer3/molina.pdf [accessed 
 5 May 2016 ] . 
 Monbiot ,  G. ( 2013 ),  Feral:  Searching for 
Enchantment on the Frontiers of 
Rewilding ,  London :  Penguin Books . 
 Monod ,  J. ( 1972 ),  Chance and Necessity:  An 
Essay on the Natural Philosophy of Modern 
Biology ,  New York :  Vintage Books . 
 Monzain ,  M. J.  ( 2009 ), ‘ Can Images Kill? ’, 
 Critical Inquiry  36 ( 1 ):  20–51 . 
 Moore ,  J ( 2013 ), ‘ Anthropocene, 
Capitalocene, and the Myth of 
Industrialization ’,  16 June ,  https://
jason w moore.word press.com/2013/06/16/
anthro po cene- capitalocene-the- myth-of- 
indus tri al iz a tion/ [accessed  7 August 
2015 ]. 
 Moore ,  J. ( 2014 ), ‘ Th e Capitalocene, Part 1 : 
 On the Nature and Origins of Our 
Ecological Crisis ’,  http://www.jason w moore.
com/uploads/Th e_Capitalocene__Part_
I__June_2014.pdf [accessed  15 March 
2016 ]. 
 Moore ,  J. ( 2015 ),  Capitalism and the Web of 
Life:  Ecology and the Accumulation of 
Capital ,  London :  Verso . 
 Moore ,  L. H. ( 1986 ),  Space, Text and Gender: 
 An Anthropological Study of the Marakwet 
of Kenya ,  Cambridge and New York : 
 Cambridge University Press . 
 Moore ,  L. H. ( 1988 ),  Feminism and 
Anthropology ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Moore ,  L. H. ( 1994 ),  A Passion for Diﬀ erence: 
 Essays in Anthropology and Gender , 
 Bloomington :  Indiana University Press .
CUMULATIVE
Nagenborg ,  M. ( 2007 ), ‘ Artiﬁ cial Moral 
Agents :  An Intercultural Perspective ’, 
 International Review of Information Ethics 
 7 :  129–33 . 
 Nakada ,  M. and  R.  Capurro ( 2013 ), ‘ An 
inter cul tural dialogue on roboeth ics ’, in  M. 
 Nakada and  R.  Capurro (eds),  Th e Quest 
for Information Ethics and Roboethics in 
East and West:  Research Report on Trends 
in Information Ethics and Roboethics in 
Japan and the West :  13–22 ,  http://www.
capurro.de/inter cul tural_roboeth ics.html   
[accessed  5 May 2016 ] . 
 Nakamura ,  L. ( 2002 ),  Cybertypes:  Race, 
Ethnicity and Identity on the Internet ,  New 
York :  Routledge . 
 Nakamura ,  L. ( 2011 ), ‘ Race and iden tity in 
digital media ’, in  J.  Curran (ed.),  Media 
and Society ,  5th ed.,  336–47 ,  New York : 
 Bloomsbury . 
 Nakamura ,  L. and  P. A.  Chow-White (eds) 
( 2012 ),  Race Aft er the Internet ,  London 
and New York :  Routledge . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 1979 ),  Ego Sum ,  Paris : 
 Flammarion . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 1997 ),  Th e Sense of the World , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ([ 1996 ]  2000 ),  Being Singular 
Plural , trans.  R. E.  Richardson and  A. E. 
 O’Byrne ,  Stanford ,  CA :  Stanford 
University Press . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ([ 1997 ]  2002 ),  Hegel:  Th e 
Restlessness of the Negative ,  Minneapolis : 
 University of Minnesota Press . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 2000 ),  L’Intrus ,  Paris : 
 Galilée . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 2003 ),  A Finite Th inking , 
 Stanford :  Stanford University Press . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 2008 ),  Corpus ,  New York : 
 Fordham University Press . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 2010 ), ‘ Art Today ’,  Journal of 
Visual Culture ,  9 ( 1 ):  91–9 . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 2012 ),  Adoration:  Th e 
Deconstruction of Christianity II ,  New 
York :  Fordham University Press . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. ( 2013 ), ‘ Of Struction ’,  Parrhesia 
 17 :  1–10 . 
 Nancy ,  J. L. and  P.  Lacoue-Labarthe ( 1992 ), 
 Th e Literary Absolute ,  New York :  SUNY  
Press . 
 Nayar ,  P. K. ( 2013 ),  Posthumanism , 
 Cambridge :  Polity Press . 
 Nealon ,  J. ( 2012 ),  Post-Postmodernism:  Or, 
the Cultural Logic of Just- in-Time 
Capitalism ,  Palo Alto :  Stanford University 
Press . 
 Negarestani ,  R. ( 2008 ),  Cyclonopedia: 
 Complicity with Anonymous Materials , 
 Melbourne :  re.press . 
 Negarestani ,  R. ( 2014 a), ‘ Th e Labor of the 
Inhuman ’,  #ACCELERATE:  Th e 
Accelerationist Reader ,  London :  Urbanomic . 
 Negarestani ,  R. ( 2014 b), ‘ Th e Labor of the 
Inhuman, Part 2 :  Th e Inhuman ’,  e- ﬂ ux ,  53 : 
 http://www.e- ﬂ ux.com/journal/the- labor-
of- the-inhuman- part-ii- the-inhuman/ 
[accessed  23 November 2015 ] . 
 Negarestani ,  R. ( 2015 ), ‘ Revolution 
Backwards :  Functional Realization and 
Computational Implementation ’, in  M. 
 Pasquinelli (ed.),  Alleys of Your Mind: 
 Augmented Intelligence ,  139–57 , 
 Luneburg :  Meson Press . 
 Neimanis ,  A. ( 2012 ), ‘ On Collaboration (for 
Barbara Godard) ’,  NORA: Nordic Journal of 
Feminist and Gender Research ,  20(3) :  1–7 . 
 Neimanis ,  A ( 2014 ), ‘ Alongside the Right to 
Water, a Posthumanist Feminist 
Imaginary ’,  Journal of Human Rights and 
the Environment ,  5 ( 1 ):  5–24 . 
 Neimanis ,  A. and  R.  Lowen  Walker ( 2014 ), 
‘ Weathering :  Climate Change and the 
“Th ick Time” of Transcorporeality ’,  
 Hypatia ,  2 9 ( 3 ):  559–75 . 
 Neimanis ,  A. ,  C.  Chen and  J.  MacLeod 
( 2013 ),  Th inking with Water ,  Montreal : 
 McGill University Press . 
 Nelson ,  A. ( 2000 ), ‘ Afrofuturism :  Past-Future 
Visions ’,  ColorLines ,  3 ( 1 ):  34–7 . 
 Newitz ,  A. ( 2015 ), ‘ Ashley Madison Code 
Shows More Women, and More Bots ’, 
 Gizmodo ,  31 August ,  http://gizmodo.com/
ashley- madison-code- shows-more- 
women-and- more-bots–1727613924 
[accessed  21 April 2017 ] .
CUMULATIVE
Olsen ,  M. ( 2008 ), ‘ Interview with Marissa 
Olsen ’,  We Make Money Not Art ,  28 
March ,  http://we- make-money- not-art.
com/archives/2008/03/how- does-one- 
become-marisa.php#.Vedu0ek2ERZ 
[accessed  15 March 2016 ] . 
 Ondaatje ,  M ( 2001 ),  Anil’s Ghost ,  New York : 
 Alfred A. Knopf . 
 Onians ,  J. ( 2007 ),  Neuroarthistory:  From 
Aristotle Pliny to Baxandall and Zeki ,  New 
Haven and London :  Yale University Press . 
 Oosterling ,  H. ( 2001 ), ‘ ICT ology and Local 
Inter- esse :  Desacralizing Derrida’s Chora ’,  
in  L.  Nagl (ed.),  Essays on Jacques Derrida 
and Gianni Vattimo, ‘Religion’ ,  109–31 , 
 Frankfurt am Main :  Peter Lang . 
 Oosterling ,  H. ( 2003 ), ‘ Sens(a)ble 
Intermediality and Interesse :  Towards an 
Ontology of the In Between ’, 
 Intermédialités ,  1 :  29–46 . 
 Oosterling ,  H. ( 2005 ), ‘ From Interests to 
Inter- esse :  Nancy on Deglobalization and 
Sovereignty ’,  SubStance ,  104 :  81–103 . 
 Oosterling ,  H. ( 2007 ), ‘ Interest and Excess of 
Modern Man’s Radical Mediocrity : 
 Rescaling Sloterdijk’s Grandiose Aesthetic 
Strategy ’,  Cultural Politics ,  3 ( 3 ):  357–80 . 
 Oosterling ,  H. ( 2010 ), ‘ Dasein is Design .  Or: 
Must Design Save the World? ’ in  From 
Mad Dutch Disease to Born to Adorn:  Th e 
Premsela Lectures 2004–2010 ,  115–40 , 
 Amsterdam :  Premsela Foundation . 
 Oosterling ,  H. ( 2013 ), ‘ Ecoliteracy in 
between Politics, Philosophy and Art :  Th e 
Shared Interests of Rotterdam Skillcity ’, in 
 I.  Gevers (ed.),  Yes, Naturally:  How Art 
Saves the World ,  100–7 ,  Rotterdam : 
 nai010 publish ers . 
 Oosterling ,  H. ( 2015 ), ‘ Mesopolitical 
Interests :  Rotterdam Skillcity as 
Rhizomatic, Ecosophical, Reﬂ active Event ’, 
in  R.  Braidotti and   R.  Dolphijn (eds),  Th is 
Deleuzean Century:  Art, Activism, Life , 
 269–98 ,  Leiden and Boston :  Brill Rodopi . 
 Oosterling ,  H. and  Płonowska Ziarek ,  E. 
(eds) ( 2011 ),  Intermedialities:  Philosophy, 
Arts, Politics ,  Lanham :  Lexington Books . 
 Oppermann ,  S. ( 2015 ), ‘ Quantum Physics 
and Literature :  How Th ey Meet the 
Universe Halfway ’,  Anglia ,  133 ( 1 ):  87–104 . 
 Oppermann ,  S. ( 2016 ), ‘ From Posthumanism 
to Posthuman Ecocriticism ’,  Relations , 
 4 ( 1 ):  23–37 . 
 Ortner ,  S. B. and  H.  Whitehead (eds) ( 1981 ), 
 Sexual Meanings:  Th e Cultural 
Construction of Gender and Sexuality , 
 Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Osborne ,  P. ( 2013 ),  Anywhere or Not at All: 
 Philosophy of Contemporary Art ,  London 
and New York :  Verso . 
 Ostrom ,  E. ( 1990 ),  Governing the Commons: 
 Th e Evolution of Institutions for Collective 
Action ,  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Oudshoorn ,  N. ( 1994 ),  Beyond the Natural 
Body:  An Archaeology of Sex Hormones , 
 London and New York :  Routledge . 
 Oxford English Dictionary ( 1989 ),  Oxford : 
 Oxford University Press . 
 Oyama ,  S. ([ 1985 ]  2000 ),  Th e Ontogeny of 
Information:  Developmental Systems and 
Evolution ,  2nd ed.,  Durham ,  NC :  Duke 
University Press . 
 Ozeki ,  R. ( 2004 ),  All Over Creation ,  New 
York :  Penguin Books . 
 Paasonen ,  S. ,  K.  Hillis and  M.  Petit ( 2015 ), 
‘ Introduction: Networks of Transmission : 
 Intensity, Sensation, Value ’, in  K.  Hillis ,  S. 
 Paasonen and  M.  Petit (eds),  Networked 
Aﬀ ect ,  1–24 ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Packard ,  V. ( 1960 ),  Th e Waste Makers ,  New 
York :  David McKay . 
 Pálsson ,  G. ,  B.  Szerszynski ,  S.  Sorlin ,  J.  Marks , 
 B.  Avril ,  C.  Crumley ,  H.  Hackmann ,  P.  
 Holm ,  J.  Ingram ,  A.  Kirman ,  M.  Pardo  
 Buendía and  R.  Weehuizen ( 2013 ), 
‘ Reconceptualizing the “Anthropos” in the 
Anthropocene :  Integrating the Social 
Sciences and Humanities in Global 
Environmental Change Research ’,  
 Environmental Science and Policy ,  28 :  3–13 . 
 Panourgiá ,  N. ( 2009 ),  Dangerous Citizens. 
 Th e Greek Left  and the Terror of the State , 
 New York :  Fordham University Press . 
 Panourgiá ,  N. ( 2017 ), ‘ Immanent 
Human(ism)s :  Engagements with James
CUMULATIVE
(eds),  Deleuze and Law ,  15–31 , 
 Edinburgh :  Edinburgh University Press . 
 Peckhaus ,  V. ( 2006 ), ‘ Die Aktualität der 
Logik als Organon ’, in  G.  Abel (ed.), 
 Kreativität: XX.  Deutscher Kongress für 
Philosophie, 26–30 September 2005 an der 
Technischen Universität Berlin: 
Kolloquienbeiträge ,  Hamburg :  Felix 
Meiner Verlag . 
 Pepi ,  M. ( 2011 ), ‘ Iconology in the Age of the 
Algorithm ’,  Artwrit ,  http://www.artwrit.
com/article/icon o logy- in-the- age-of- the-
algorithm/ [accessed  16 November 2015 ] . 
 Pepperell ,  R. ( 1997 ),  Th e Posthuman 
Condition ,  Exeter :  Intellect . 
 Pepperell ,  R. ( 2003 ), ‘ Th e Posthuman 
Manifesto ’,  Intellect Quarterly ,  Winter 
2003 ,   http://www.intel lect books.co.uk/
File:down load,id=411/Peperell.pdf 
[accessed  26 May 2016 ] . 
 Peters ,  J. D. ( 2015 ),  Marvelous Clouds: 
 Toward a Philosophy of Elemental Media , 
 Chicago :  Chicago University Press . 
 Peters ,  M. A. ( 2012 ), ‘ Algorithmic Capitalism 
and Educational Futures :  Informationalism 
and the Googlization of Knowledge ’,  
 truth- out.org ,  4 May ,  http://www.truth- out.
org/news/item/8887-algorithmic- 
capitalism-and- educational-futures- 
informationalism-and-the-googlization- 
of-knowledge  [accessed  5 May 2016 ] . 
 Phillips ,  D. K. and  M.  Legard  Larson ( 2013 ), 
‘ Th e Teacher-Student Writing Conference 
Reimaged :  Entangled Becoming-
Writingconferencing ’,  Gender and 
Education ,  25 ( 6 ):  722–37 . 
 Pickering ,  A. ,  (1995 ),  Th e Mangle of Practice: 
 Time, Agency, and Science ,  Chicago : 
 University of Chicago Press . 
  Pirici ,  A. and  R.  Voinea ( 2015 ), ‘ Manifesto 
for the Gynecene :  Sketch of a New 
Geological Era ’,  http://ro.tranzit.org/ﬁ le/
MANIFESTO-for- the-Gynecene.pdf 
[accessed  23 November 2015 ]. 
 Pisters ,  P. ( 2014 ), ‘ Transplanting Life :  Bios 
and Zoe in Images with Imagination ’, in 
 B.  Blaagaard and  I.  van der  Tuin (eds),  Th e 
Subject of Rosi Braidotti:  Politics and 
Concepts ,  65–71 ,  London and New York : 
 Bloomsbury . 
 Plant ,  S.  ( 1997 ),  Zeros and Ones:  Digital 
Women and the New Technoculture , 
 London :  Fourth Estate . 
 Plumwood ,  V. ( 1993 ),  Feminism and the 
Mastery of Nature ,  New York and London : 
 Routledge . 
 Plumwood ,  V. ( 2002 ),  Environmental 
Culture:  Th e Ecological Crisis of Reason , 
 London :  Routledge . 
 Plumwood ,  V. ( 2003 ), ‘ Animals and Ecology : 
 Towards a Better Integration ’, unpub lished 
paper in the Australian  National 
University Digital Collection ,   http://hdl.
handle.net/1885/41767 [accessed  4 April 
2017 ]. 
 Poliquin ,  R. ( 2012 ),  Th e Breathless Zoo: 
 Taxidermy and the Cultures of Longing , 
 University Park :  Pennsylvania State 
University Press . 
 Ponzanesi ,  S. and  D.  Merolla ( 2005 ),  Migrant 
Cartographies:  New Cultural and Literary 
Spaces in Post- colo nial Europe ,  Oxford : 
 Lexington Books . 
 Poot ,  D. and  J.  Staal ( 2013 ),  New World 
Academy, Reader #3:  Leaderless Politics , 
 Utrecht :  BAK , basis voor actuele kunst . 
 Pope Francis ( 2015 ),  Encyclical Letter 
Laudato si’:  On Care for our Common 
Home ,  Rome :  Th e Vatican Press . 
 Posocco ,  S. ( 2014 ), ‘ On the Queer 
Necropolitics of Transnational Adoption 
in Guatemala ’, in  J.  Haritaworn ,  A. 
 Kuntsman and  S.  Posocco (eds),  Queer 
Necropolitics ,  New York :  Routledge . 
 Preciado ,  P. B. ( 2013 ),  Testo Junkie:  Sex, 
Drugs and Biopolitics in the 
Pharmacopornographic Era ,  New York : 
 Th e Feminist Press at the City University 
of New York . 
 Pritchard ,  H. ( 2013 ), ‘ Th inking with the 
Animal-Hacker :  Articulation in Ecologies 
of Earth Observation ’,  APRJA ,  http://www.
aprja.net/?p=990 [accessed  13 January 
2016 ] . 
 Protevi ,  J. ( 2001 ), ‘ Th e Geophilosophies of 
Deleuze and Guattari ’, talk delivered at
CUMULATIVE
Raqs Media Collective ,  R.  Sundaram 
and  D.  Zyman ( 2012 ), ‘ Th e And: An 
Expanded Questionnaire on the 
Contemporary: Has the Moment of the 
Contemporary Come and Gone? ’,  Asia 
Art Archive: Field
CUMULATIVE
Rudwick ,  M. J. S. ( 2014 ),  Earth’s Deep 
History: How It Was Discovered and Why 
It Matters ,  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press . 
 Rueckert ,  W. ([ 1978 ]  1996 ), ‘ Literature and 
Ecology: An Experiment in Ecocriticism ’ , 
in  C.  Glotfelty and  H.  Fromm (eds),  Th e 
Ecocriticism Reader: Landmarks in 
Literary Ecology ,
  Athens :  University of Georgia Press : 
 105–23 . 
 Rukeyser ,  M. ( 1973 ),  Breaking Open ,  New 
York :  Random House . 
  Rule ,  A. and  D.  Levine ( 2012 ), ‘ International 
Art English. On the Rise – and the Space 
– of the Art- world Press Release ’,  Triple 
Canopy ,  16 ,  https://www.canopycan opy
can opy.com/contents/inter na tional_art_
english [accessed  26 May 2016 ]. 
 Rust ,  S. A. and  C.  Soles ( 2014 ), ‘ Ecohorror 
Special Cluster: Living in Fear, Living in 
Dread, Pretty Soon We’ll All Be Dead ’ , 
 Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and 
Environment  21 ( 3 ) (Summer):  509–12 . 
 Rutland ,  B. ( 2004 ), ‘ Th e Transject: Th e 
Ethical Subject of Postmodernity ’ , 
in  B.  Gabriel and  S.  Ilcan (eds), 
 Postmodernism and the Ethical Subject , 
 Montreal :  McGill-Queen’s University 
Press . 
 Ryle ,  G. ([ 1949 ]  2009 ),  Th e Concept of Mind , 
 London :  Routledge ,. 
 Sacks ,  O. ( 2007 ),  Musicophilia:  Tales of Music 
and the Brain ,  Basingstoke and Oxford : 
 Picador . 
 Said ,  E. ( 2003 ), ‘ Introduction ’ , in  E.  Auerbach , 
 Mimesis: Th e Representation of Reality in 
Western Literature ,  Princeton :  Princeton 
University Press . 
 Said ,  E. ( 2004 ),  Humanism and Democratic 
Criticism ,  New York :  Columbia University 
Press . 
 Sakai ,  N. ( 1997 ),  Translation and 
Subjectivity:  On ‘Japan’ and Cultural 
Nationalism ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Sakai ,  N. ( 2006 ), ‘ Translation ’ ,  Th eory, Culture 
& Society  23 ( 2–3 ):  71–86 . 
 Samson ,  A. ( 2015 ), ‘ Erasure, an Attempt to 
Surpass Dataﬁ cation ’,  APRJA Dataﬁ ed 
Research Issue ,  4 ( 1 ),  http://www.aprja.
net/?p=2444 [accessed  23 October 2015 ]. 
 Sanderson  H. ( 2013 ), ‘ Human Resolution ’, 
 Mute ,  4 April ,  http://www.metamute.org/
edit or ial/articles/human- resol u tion 
[accessed:  21 March 2016 ]. 
 Sandvig ,  C. ,  K.  Hamilton ,  K.  Karahalios and 
 C.  Langbort ( 2014 ), ‘ An Algorithm Audit ’ , 
in  S.  Peña  Gangadharan (ed.),  Data and 
Discrimination: Collected Essays ,  6–10 , 
 Washington :  New America Foundation . 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2001 ),  Th e Global City .  Princeton : 
 Princeton University Press . 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2014 ),  Expulsions:  Brutality and 
Complexity in the Global Economy , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  Harvard University 
Press . 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2015 ), ‘ Who owns our cities – and 
why this urban takeover should concern us 
all ’,  Guardian ,  24 November ,  https://www.
theguard ian.com/cities/2015/nov/24/
who- owns-our- cities-and- why-this- urban-
takeover- should-concern- us-all [accessed 
 28 April 2017 ]. 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2016 a), ‘ Th e Global City: Enabling 
Economic Intermediation and Bearing 
Its Costs ’ ,  City & Community ,  15 ( 2 ): 
 97–108 . 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2016 b), ‘ A Massive Loss of 
Habitat: New Drivers for Migration ’ , 
 Sociology of Development ,  2 ( 2 ):  204–33 . 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2017 a), ‘ Predatory Formations 
Dressed in Wall Street Suits and 
Algorithmic Math ’ ,  Science, Technology & 
Society ,  22 ( 1 ):  6–20 . 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2017 b), ‘ Is Rohingya Persecution 
Caused by Business Interests rather than 
Religion? ’,  Guardian ,  4 January ,  https://
www.theguard ian.com/global- 
development-professionals- network/2017/
jan/04/is- rohingya-persecution- caused-
by- business-interests- rather-than- reli gion 
[accessed  28 April 2017 ]. 
 Sassen ,  S. ( 2017 c), ‘ Land Grabs are Partly to 
Blame for Skyrocketing Violence in 
Central America ’,  Huﬃ  ngton Post ,  16
CUMULATIVE
Architecture of Public Truth ,  New York : 
 Sternberg . 
 Schuppli ,  S. ( 2014 b), ‘ Deadly Algorithms: 
Can Legal Codes Hold Soft ware 
Accountable for Code that Kills? ’ ,  Radical 
Philosophy  187 :  2–8 . 
 Schuppli ,  S. ( 2017 ),  Material Witness: 
 Forensic Media and the Production of 
Evidence  ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Schüttpelz ,  E. ([ 1872 ]  2015 ), ‘ Auf der 
Schwelle zwis chen Animismus und 
Spiritismus: Der “Geisterangriﬀ ” auf 
Edward Tylor (London 1872) ’ , in  I.  Albers 
and  A.  Franke (eds),  Animismus – 
Revisionen der Moderne ,  153–72 ,  Zurich : 
 Diaphanes . 
 Schwartzburg ,  Y. ,  R.  Testuz ,  A.  Tagliasacchi 
and  M,  Pauly ( 2014 ), ‘ High Contrast 
Computational Caustic Design ’ ,  ACM 
Transactions on Graphics ,  33 ( 4 ): 
 74:1–74:11 . 
 Sconce ,  J. ( 2000 ),  Haunted Media:  Electronic 
Presence from Telegraphy to Television , 
 Durham ,  NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Scott ,  D. N. ( 2015 ), ‘ We are the Monitors 
Now: Experiential Knowledge, 
Transcorporeality and Environmental 
Justice ’ ,  Social and Legal Studies , (no vol.): 
 1–26 . 
 Scott ,  W. R. ( 1994 ), ‘ Institutions and 
Organizations: Toward a Th eoretical 
Synthesis ’ , in  W. R.  Scott and  J. W.  Meyer 
(eds),  Institutional Environments and 
Organizations: Structural Complexity and 
Individualism ,  55–80 ,  Th ousand Oaks : 
 SAGE . 
 Scrimgeour ,  A. ( 2014 ), ‘ Participate Don’t 
Dominate: An Interview with Curator 
and Activist Ben Vickers ’,  Spike Art 
Magazine ,  39 ,  http://www.spikeart-
magazine.com/en/articles/parti cip ate- 
dont-dominate- interview-curator- and-
activist- ben-vickers [accessed  6 May 
2016 ]. 
 Seaman ,  M. and  E. A.  Joy (eds) ( 2016 ), 
 Fragments for a History of a Vanishing 
Humanism ,  Columbus :  Ohio State 
University Press . 
 Sedgwick ,  E. K. and  A.  Frank (eds) (1995), 
 Shame and its Sisters:  A Silvan Tomkins 
Reader ,  Durham ,  NC :  Duke University 
Press . 
 Segan ,  S. ( 2013 ), ‘ Google Glass’s White Male 
Problem ’,  PC Magazine ,  1 May ,  http://
www.pcmag.com/
article2/0,2817,2418415,00.asp   [accessed 
 1 December 2015 ]. 
 Seibt ,  J. ( 2016 ), ‘ Towards an Ontology of 
Simulated Social Interactions: Varieties 
of the “As-If” for Robots and Humans ’ , 
in  R.  Hakli and  J.  Seibt (eds),  Sociality 
and Normativity for Robots: Philosophical 
Investigations ,  New York :  Springer .  
 Seibt ,  J. ,  R.  Hakli and  M.  Nørskov (eds) 
( 2014 ),  Sociable Robots and the Future of 
Social Relations:  Proceedings of Robo-
Philosophy 2014 ,  Amsterdam :  IOS Press . 
 Seibt ,  J. ,  R.  Hakli and  M.  Nørskov (eds) 
( 2016 ),  Robophilosophy:  Philosophy of, for, 
and by Social Robotics ,  Cambridge ,  MA : 
 MIT  Press . 
 Sekula ,  A. ( 1996 ),  Fish Story ,  Dusseldorf : 
 Richeter . 
 Sell ,  M. ( 2013 ), ‘ Avant-Garde/Roma: A 
Critical History of Bohemianism and 
Cultral Politics ’ , in   D.   Baker and   M. 
 Hlavajova (eds),  We Roma: A Critical 
Reader in Contemporary Art ,  Utrecht : 
 BAK ; Amsterdam: Valiz . 
 Sennett ,  R. ( 2008 ),  Th e Craft sman ,  London : 
 Penguin Books . 
 Serres ,  M. ([ 1968 ]  2004 ),  Le Système de 
Leibniz et ses Modèles Mathématiques , 
 Paris  :  PUF [Kindle edition] . 
 Serres ,  M. ([ 1974 ]  1992 ), ‘ Leben, 
Information, und der zweite Hauptsatz 
der Th ermodynamik ’ , in  Hermes  III  
Übersetzung ,  53–96 ,  Berlin :  Merve . 
 Serres ,  M. ([ 1977 ]  2000 ),  Th e Birth of Physics , 
 Manchester :  Clinamen Press . 
 Serres ,  M. ([ 1980 ]  1982 ),  Th e Parasite , 
 Baltimore ,  MD :  Johns Hopkins University 
Press . 
 Serres ,  M. ([ 1991 ]  1997 ),  Th e Troubadour of 
Knowledge ,  Ann Arbor :  University of 
Michigan Press
CUMULATIVE
Languages ,  112–71 ,  Canberra :  Australian 
Institute of Aboriginal Studies . 
 Silverstein ,  M. ( 1979 ), ‘ Shift ers, Linguistic 
Categories and Cultural Description ’ , in 
 K.  Bassoand and  H. A.  Selby (eds), 
 Meaning in Anthropology ,  11–53 , 
 Albuquerque :  University of New Mexico 
Press . 
 Simondon ,  G. ([ 1958 ]  2012 ),  Du mode 
d’existence des objets tech niques ,  Paris : 
 Aubier . 
 Simondon ,  G. ([ 1958 ]  1980 ),  On the Mode of 
Existence of Technical Objects , trans.  N. 
 Mellamphy ,  University of Western 
Ontario ,  http://deph as age.ocular- witness.
com/pdf/SimondonGilbert.
OnTh eModeOfExistence.pdf   [accessed  4 
April 2017 ]. 
 Simondon ,  G. ([ 1964 and 1989]  2005 ), 
 L’individuation à la lumière des notions de 
forme et d’information ,  Grenoble :  Jérôme 
Millon . 
 Simondon ,  G. ( 1992 ), ‘ Th e Genesis of the 
Individual ’ , in  J.  Crary and  S.  Kwinter 
(eds),  Zone 6: Incorporations ,  Cambridge , 
 MA  :  MIT Press. 
 Simondon ,  G. ([ 2004 ]  2011 ),  Two Lessons on 
Animal and Man ,  Minneapolis :  Univocal 
Publishing . 
 Simondon ,  G. ( 2014 ),  Sur la tech nique 
(1953–1983) ,  Paris :  Presses Universitaires 
de France . 
 Simpkins ,  R. ( 2016 ), ‘ Trans*femin ist 
Intersections ’ ,  TSQ: Transgender Studies 
Quarterly ,  3 ( 1–2 ):  228–34 . 
 Singer ,  P. ( 1975 ),  Animal Liberation:  A New 
Ethics for Our Treatment of Animals ,  New 
York :  Harper Collins . 
 Singleton ,  B. ( 2014 ), ‘ Maximum Jailbreak ’ , in 
 #ACCELERATE: Th e Accelerationist 
Reader .  London :  Urbanomic . 
 Sison ,  J. M. ( 2013 ),  Th e Guerilla is a Poet , 
 Tirana :  Uitgeverij . 
 Sison ,  J. M. and  J.  Staal (eds) ( 2013 ),  New 
World Academy, Reader #1: Towards a 
People’s Culture ,  Utrecht :  BAK , basis voor 
actuele kunst . 
 Slaby ,  J. ( 2010 ), ‘ Steps towards a Critical 
Neuroscience ’ ,  Phenomenological 
Cognitive Science  9 :  397–416 . 
 Sloterdijk ,  P. ( 1989 ),  Eurotaoismus:  Zur 
Kritik der polit ischen Kinetik ,  Frankfurt 
am Main :  Suhrkamp . 
 Sloterdijk ,  P. ([ 2004 ]  2016 ),  Foams: Spheres 
III :  Plural Spherology , trans.  W.  Hoban , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Sloterdijk ,  P. ( 2009 a), ‘ Rules for the Human 
Zoo: A Response to the “Letter on 
Humanism ” ’ ,  Environment and Planning 
D: Society and Space ,  27 :  12–28 . 
 Sloterdijk ,  P. ( 2009 b),  Terror from the Air , 
trans.  A.  Patton and  S.  Corcoran ,  Los 
Angeles :  Semiotext(e) . 
 Sloterdijk ,  P. ( 2014 ),  Globes , South Pasadena: 
Semiotext(e);  Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT  
Press . 
 Sloterdijk ,  P. ( 2015 ), ‘ Th e Anthropocene: A 
Process-State at the Edge of Geohistory? ’ , 
in  H.   Davis and  E.  Turpin (eds),  Art in the 
Anthropocene: Encounters Among 
Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and 
Epistemologies ,  338–9 ,  London :  Open 
Humanities Press .  
 Smelik ,  A. ( 2011 ), ‘ Th e Performance of 
Authenticity ’ ,  Address: Journal for Fashion 
Writing and Criticism ,  1 ( 1 ):  76–82 . 
 Smelik ,  A. ( 2016 ), ‘ Gilles Deleuze: Bodies- 
without-Organs in the Folds of Fashion ’ 
in  A.  Rocamora and  A.  Smelik (eds), 
 Th inking Th rough Fashion: A Guide to Key 
Th eorists ,  164–83 ,  London :  I.B.Tauris . 
 Smelik ,  A. ( 2017 ), ‘ Cybercouture: Th e 
Fashionable Technology of Pauline van 
Dongen, Iris van Herpen and Bart Hess ’ , 
in  A.  Smelik (ed.),  Delft  Blue to Denim 
Blue: Contemporary Dutch Fashion , 
 London :  I.B.Tauris . 
 Smelik ,  A. ,  L.  Toussaint and  P. van  Dongen 
( 2016 ), ‘ Solar Fashion: A New Materialist 
Approach to Wearable Technology ’ , 
 International Journal of Fashion Studies , 
 3 ( 2 ):  287–303 . 
 Smith ,  B. C. ( 1999 ), ‘ Situatedness/
Embeddedness ’ , in  R. A.  Wilson and  F. C. 
 Keil (eds),  Th e MIT Encyclopedia of the
CUMULATIVE
S.  Easterbrook (ed.),  CSCW: Cooperation 
or Conﬂ ict?  93–106 ,  London :  Springer . 
 Ste Croix ,  G. E. M. de ( 1972 ),  Th e Origins of 
the Peloponnesian War ,  Ithaca :  Cornell 
University Press . 
 Ste Croix ,  G. E. M. de ( 1981 ),  Th e Class 
Struggle in the Ancient Greek World , 
 Ithaca :  Cornell University Press . 
 Steﬀ en ,  W. ,  W.  Broadgate ,  L.  Deutsch ,  O. 
 Gaﬀ ney and  C.  Ludwig ( 2015 ), ‘ Th e 
Trajectory of the Anthropocene: Th e 
Great Acceleration ’ ,  Th e Anthropocene 
Review ,  2 ( 1 ):  81–98 . 
 Steﬀ en ,  W. ,  P. J.  Crutzen and  J. R.  McNeill 
( 2007 ), ‘ Th e Anthropocene: Are Humans 
Now Overwhelming the Great Forces of 
Nature? ’ ,  Ambio, Royal Swedish Academy 
of Sciences ,  36 ( 8 ):  614–21 . 
 Steﬀ en ,  W. ,  J.  Grinevald ,  P.  Crutzen and 
 J.  McNeill ( 2011 ), ‘ Th e Anthropocene: 
Conceptual and Historical Perspectives ’ , 
 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society A  369 ( 1938 ):  842–67 . 
 Steinberg ,  P. ( 2001 ),  Th e Social Construction 
of the Ocean ,  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Steinhart ,  E. ( 2004 ), ‘ Th e Physics of 
Information ’ , in  L.  Floridi (ed.),  Th e 
Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of 
Computing and Information ,  178–85 , 
 Oxford :  Blackwell . 
 Stengers ,  I. ( 1987 ),  D’une Science à l’Autre: 
Des Concepts Nomades ,  Paris :  Seuil . 
 Stengers ,  I. ( 2005 ), ‘ Th e Cosmopolitical 
Proposal ’ , in  B.  Latour and  P.  Weibel (eds), 
 Making Th ings Public: Atmospheres of 
Democracy ,  994–1003 ,  Cambridge ,  MA : 
 MIT  Press. 
 Stengers ,  I. ([ 1997 ]  2011 a),  Cosmopolitics II , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Stengers ,  I. ([ 2002 ]  2011 b),  Th inking with 
Whitehead: A Free and Wild Creation of 
Concepts ,  Cambridge ,  MA :  Harvard 
University Press . 
 Stengers ,  I. ([ 2003 ]  2010 ),  Cosmopolitics I , 
 Minneapolis :  University of Minnesota 
Press . 
 Stengers ,  I. ( 2005 ), ‘ Introductory
CUMULATIVE
TallBear ,  K. ( 2011 ), ‘ Why Interspecies 
Th inking Needs Indigenous Standpoints ’, 
 Cultural Anthropology ,  24 April ,  http://
culanth.org/ﬁ eld sights/260-why- 
interspecies-thinking- needs-indigenous- 
stand points [accessed  13 January 2016 ]. 
 TallBear ,  K. ( 2013 ),  Native American DNA: 
 Tribal Belonging and the False Promise of 
Genetic Science ,  Minneapolis :  University 
of Minnesota Press . 
 TallBear ,  K. ( 2016 ), ‘ Dear Indigenous Studies, 
It’s Not Me, It’s You. Why I Left  and What 
Needs to Change ’ , in  A.  Moreton-
Robinson (ed.),  Critical Indigenous 
Studies: Engagements in First World 
Locations ,  69–82 ,  Tucson :  University of 
Arizona Press . 
 Tarde ,  G. ( 2012 ),  Monadology and Sociology , 
 Melbourne :  re.press . 
 Taussig ,  M. ( 1986 ),  Shamanism, Colonialism, 
and the Wild Man:  A Study in Terror and 
Healing ,  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press . 
 Tavares ,  P. ( 2014 a), ‘ Th e Geological 
Imperative: On the Political Ecology of 
the Amazonia’s Deep History ’ , in  E. 
 Turpin (ed.),  Architecture in the 
Anthropocene: Encounters Among Design, 
Deep Time, Science and Philosophy , 
 209–40 ,  Ann Arbor :  Open Humanities 
Press . 
 Tavares ,  P. ( 2014 b), ‘ Nonhuman Rights ’ , in 
 Forensic Architecture (ed.),  Forensis: Th e 
Architecture of Public Truth ,  Berlin : 
 Sternberg Press . 
 Taylor ,  A. and  V.  Pacini-Ketchabaw ( 2015 ), 
‘ Introduction: Unsettling the Colonial 
Places and Spaces of Early Childhood 
Education in Settler Colonial Societies ’ , in 
 Unsettling the Colonial Places and Spaces of 
Early Childhood Education ,  1–19 ,  New 
York and London  :  Routledge .  
 Taylor ,  C. A. and  G.  Ivinson ( 2013 ), ‘ Material 
Feminisms: New Directions for Education ’ , 
 Gender and Education  ,  25 ( 6 ):  665–70 .  
 Taylor ,  M. A. ( 2012 ), ‘ Th e Nature of Fear: 
Edgar Allan Poe and Posthuman Ecology ’ , 
 American Literature ,  84 ( 2 ):  353–79 . 
 Taylor ,  M. A. ( 2013 ),  Universes Without Us: 
 Posthuman Cosmologies in American 
Literature ,  Minneapolis :  University of 
Minnesota Press . 
 Tazzioli ,  M. ( 2014 ),  Spaces of 
Governmentality:  Autonomous Migration 
and the Arab Uprisings ,  London :  Rowman 
& Littleﬁ eld . 
 Tegmark ,  M. ( 2010 ), ‘ Many Worlds in 
Context ’ , in  S.  Saunders ,  J.  Barrett ,  A.  Kent 
and  D.  Wallace (eds),  Many Worlds? 
Everett, Quantum Th eory and Reality , 
 553–891 ,  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press . 
 Teilhard de Chardin ,  P. ([ 1923 ]  1966 ). 
‘ Hominization ’ , in  Th e Vision of the Past , 
 51–79 ,  New York and Evanston :  Harper & 
Row . 
 Terranova ,  T. ( 2003 ), ‘ Free Labor: Producing 
Culture for the Digital Economy ’ ,  Social 
Text ,  18 ( 2 ):  33–58 . 
 Terranova ,  T.  ( 2004 ),   Network Culture , 
 London and Ann Arbor :  Pluto Press . 
 Terranova ,  T. ( 2006 ), ‘ Of Sense and 
Sensibility: Immaterial Labour in Open 
Systems ’ , in  Curating Immateriality ,  New 
York :  Autonomedia . 
 Terranova ,  T. ( 2015 ), ‘ Securing the Social: 
Foucault and Social Networks ’ , in  S.  Fuggle , 
 Y.  Lanci and  M.  Tazzioli (eds),  Foucault and 
the History of Our Present ,  111–27 , 
 Basingstoke :  Palgrave Macmillan .  
 Terranova ,  T. ( 2016 ), ‘ A Neomonadology of 
the Social Brain ’ , in  I.  Blom (ed.),  Memory 
in Motion: Archives, Technology and the 
Social ,  Amsterdam :  Amsterdam 
University Press . 
 Terzidis ,  K. ( 2006 ),  Algorithmic Architecture , 
 Oxford :  Architectural Press . 
 Th acker ,  E. ( 2004 ),  Biomedia ,  Minneapolis : 
 University of Minnesota Press . 
 Th albourne ,  M. A. and  L.  Storm ( 2012 ), ‘ Has 
the Sheep–Goat Variable Had Its Day? 
Testing Transliminality as a Psi Predictor ’ , 
 Australian Journal of Parapsychology , 
 12 ( 1 ):  69–80 . 
 Th ayil ,  J. ( 2012 ),  Narcopolis: A Novel ,  New 
York :  Penguin Books .
CUMULATIVE
Vercellone ,  C. ( 2007 ), ‘ From Formal 
Subsumption to General Intellect: 
Elements for a Marxist Reading of the 
Th esis of Cognitive Capitalism ’ ,  Historical 
Materialism ,  15 :  13–36 . 
 Vercellone ,  C. ( 2015 ), ‘ From the Crisis to the 
“Welfare of the Common” as a New Mode 
of Production ’ ,  Th eory, Culture & Society , 
 32 ( 7–8 ):  85–99 . 
 Vermeulen ,  T. ( 2014 ), ‘ Aesthetics and the 
As- if ’ , in  H.  Slager (ed.),  Experimental 
Aesthetics ,  42–6 ,  Utrecht :  Metropolis M 
Books . 
 Vermeulen ,  T. ( 2015 ), ‘ Th oughts on the Space 
of Contemporary Sculpture, or: Stringing 
Along ’ , in  J.  Heiser and  E.  Grubinger (eds), 
 Materiality in Times of Immateriality , 
 29–34 ,   Berlin  :  Sternberg Press .  
 Vermeulen ,  T. and  R. van den  Akker ( 2010 ), 
‘
CUMULATIVE
Walter-Herrmann ,  J. and  C.  Büching (eds) 
( 2013 ),  FabLab:  Of Machines, Makers and 
Inventors ,  Bielefeld :  Transcript . 
 Wang ,  S. C. ( 2003 ), ‘ On the Continuity of 
Background and Mass Extinction ’ , 
 Paleobiology ,  29 ( 4 ):  455–67 . 
 Wark ,  M. ( 2015 a),  Molecular Red:  Th eory for 
the Anthropocene ,  London and New York : 
Verso. 
 Wark  M. ( 2015 b), ‘ Th e Vectorialist Class ’, 
 e- ﬂ ux journal 56th Venice Biennale ,  65 , 
 http://super com munity.e- ﬂ ux.com/texts/
the- vectoralist-class/ [accessed  21 March 
2016 ]. 
 Warner ,  M. ( 2002 ),  Publics and 
Counterpublics ,  New York :  Zone . 
 Warren ,  K. (ed.) ( 1994 ),  Ecological Feminism , 
 London :  Routledge . 
 Watts ,  M. ( 2000 ),  Struggles over Geography: 
 Violence, Freedom, and Development , 
 Heidelberg :  University of Heidelberg . 
 We Are Here and Staal ,  J. (eds) ( 2013 ),  New 
World Academy, Reader #2: Collective 
Struggle of Refugees ,  Utrecht :  BAK , basis 
voor actuele kunst . 
 Weheliye ,  A. ( 2014 ),  Habeas Viscus: 
 Racializing Assemblages, Biopolitics, and 
Black Feminist Th eories of the Human , 
 Durham.  NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Wehner ,  R. ( 2005 ), ‘ Sensory Physiology: 
Brainless Eyes ’ ,  Nature ,  435 :  157–9 . 
 Weiner ,  A. ( 1976 ),  Women of Value, Men of 
Renown:  New Perspectives in Trobriand 
Exchange ,  Austin :  University of Texas 
Press . 
 Weinstone ,  A. ( 2004 ),  Avatar Bodies:  A 
Tantra for Posthumanism ,  Minneapolis : 
 University of Minnesota Press . 
 Weisle ,  A. J. ( 2011 ), ‘ When did we Become 
Post/Human? ’  postme di eval: a journal of 
medi eval cultural studies ,  Medieval 
Feminist Forum: Journal of the Society for 
Medieval Feminist Scholarship ,  47 ( 1 ): 
 98–101 . 
 Weiss ,  G. ( 1999 ),  Body Images:  Embodiment 
as Intercorporeality ,  New York :  Routledge . 
 Weisskopf ,  V. ( 1969 ), ‘ Symmetry and 
func tion in biolo gical systems at the 
macro molec u lar level ’ ,  Nobel Symposium 
No. 11 , ed. Engstrom and Strandberg, 
 New York :  Wiley . 
 Weizman ,  E. ( 2012 ),  Th e Least of All Possible 
Evils:  Humanitarian Violence from Arendt 
to Gaza ,  London : Verso. 
 Weizman ,  E. ( 2014 ), ‘ Introduction ’ , in 
 Forensic Architecture (ed.),  Forensis: Th e 
Architecture of Public Truth ,  Berlin : 
 Sternberg Press . 
 Weizman ,  E. ,  H.  Davis and  E.  Turpin , E. 
( 2013 ), ‘ Matters of Calculation: Eyal 
Weizman in Conversation with Heather 
Davis and Etienne Turpin ’ , in  E.  Turpin 
(ed.),  Architecture in the Anthropocene: 
Encounters among Design, Deep Time, 
Science, and Philosophy ,  63–82 ,  Ann 
Arbor :  Open Humanities Press . 
 Wennemann ,  D. J. ( 2013 ),  Posthuman 
Personhood ,  Lanham :  University Press of 
America . 
 West ,  C. ( 1989 ), ‘ Black Culture and 
Postmodernism ’ , in  B.  Kruger and  P. 
 Mariani  (eds),   Remaking History ,  87–96 , 
 Seattle :  Bay Press . 
 Westling ,  L. ( 2013 ),  Th e Cambridge 
Companion to Literature and the 
Environment ,  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Wexler ,  B. ( 2006 ),  Brain and Culture: 
 Neurobiology, Ideology, and Social Change , 
 Cambridge ,  MA :  MIT Press . 
 Wexler ,  B. ( 2010 ), ‘ Shaping the Environments 
that Shape Our Brains: A Long-Term 
Perspective ’ , in  D.  Hauptmann and  W. 
 Neidich (eds),  Cognitive Architecture: 
From Bio-Politics To Noo-Politics ,  142–67 , 
 Rotterdam :  010 Publishers . 
 Weyl ,  H. ([ 1918 ]  1994 ),  Th e Continuum:  A 
Critical Examination of the Foundation of 
Analysis ,  London :  Dover Publications . 
 Whatmore ,  S. ( 2002 ),  Hybrid Geographies: 
 Natures Cultures Spaces ,  London :  Sage . 
 Whatmore ,  S. ( 2012 ), ‘ Hybrid Cartographies 
for a Relational Ethics ’ , in  A. L.   Harrison 
(ed.),  Architectural Th eories of the 
Environment: Posthuman Territory ,  New 
York and London :  Routledge .
CUMULATIVE
Wolfe ,  C. ( 2010 ),  What is Posthumanism? 
 Posthumanities Series ,  Minneapolis : 
 University of Minnesota Press . 
 Wolfe ,  T. ( 1929 ),  Look Homeward, Angel , 
 New York :  Scribner . 
 Wolfendale ,  P. ( 2014 ),  Object-Oriented 
Philosophy:  Th e Noumenon’s New Clothes , 
 London :  Urbanomic . 
 Wolfendale ,  P. (forth com ing), ‘ Th e 
Reformatting of Homo Sapiens ’ , in  Th e 
Inhuman ,  Berlin :  Merve Verlag . 
 Wolﬀ  ,  E. W. ( 2014 ), ‘ Ice Sheets and the 
Anthropocene ’ , in  C. N.  Waters ,  J. A. 
 Zalasiewicz ,  M.  Williams ,  M. A.  Ellis and 
 A. M.  Snelling (eds),  A Stratigraphical 
Basis for the Anthropocene ,  255–63 , 
 London :  Geological Society, Special 
Publications . 
 Wolfram ,  S. ( 2002 ),  A New Kind of Science , 
 Champaign ,  IL :  Wolfram Media 
  Womack ,  Y. L. ( 2013 ),  Afrofuturism:  Th e 
World of Black Sci-Fi and Fantasy Culture , 
 Chicago :  Chicago Review Press . 
 Woodard ,  B. ( 2015 ), ‘ Less World to be 
Ourselves. A Note on Postapocalyptic 
Simpliﬁ cation ’,  E-Flux journal 56th Venice 
Biennale ,  6 August ,   http://super com munity.
e- ﬂ ux.com/texts/less- world-to- be-
ourselves- a-note- on-post- apocalyptic-
simpliﬁ cation/ [accessed  6 May 2016 ]. 
 Wordsworth ,  W. ( 1996 ),  Th e Prelude:  A 
Parallel Text ,  Harmondsworth :  Penguin . 
 Worland ,  J. ( 2015 ), ‘ Climate Change Could 
Drive More Th an 100 Million Into 
Poverty by 2030, Report Says ’,  Time ,  8 
November ,  http://time.com/4104289/
climate- change-poverty- world-bank/ 
[accessed  8 January 2016 ]. 
 World Bank ( 2006 ),  Social Resilience and 
State Fragility in Haiti: A Country Social 
Analysis , Caribbean Country 
Management Unit,  ESSD Sector 
Management Unit, Latin America and the 
Caribbean Region Report No. 36069–HT, 
27 April. 
 World Bank ( 2008 ),  Climate Resilient Cities: 
A Primer on Reducing Vulnerabilities to 
Climate Change Impacts and 
Strengthening Disaster Risk Management 
in East Asian Cities , Sustainable 
Development East Asia and Paciﬁ c 
Region, Washington  DC : World Bank. 
 World Transhumanist Association and 
others ( 2002 ), ‘ Th e Transhumanist 
Declaration ’,  Humanity + ,  http://
human i typlus.org/philo sophy/
transhuman ist- declar a tion/ [accessed 
 7 November 2015 ]. 
 Wright ,  S. ( 2013 ),  Towards a Lexicon of 
Usership ,  Eindhoven: Van Abbemuseum , 
 http://museu mar teutil.net/wp- content/
uploads/2013/12/Toward- a-lexicon- of-
usership.pdf [accessed  6 May 2016 ]. 
 Wynsberghe ,  A. (van) ( 2015 ),  Healthcare 
Robots:  Ethics, Design, and 
Implementation ,  New York :  Routledge . 
 Wynter ,  S. ( 1994 ), ‘ No Humans Involved: An 
Open Letter to My Colleagues ’ ,  Forum 
N.H.I. Knowledge for the 21st Century , 
 1 ( 1 ):  42–74 . 
 Wynter ,  S. ( 2003 ), ‘ Unsettling the Coloniality 
of Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards 
the Human, Aft er Man, Its 
Overrepresentation – An Argument ’ ,  CR: 
Th e New Centennial Review ,  3 ( 3 ): 
 257–337 . 
 Wynter ,  S. and  K.  McKittrick ( 2015 ), 
‘ Unparalleled Catastrophe for Our 
Species: Or, to Give Humanness a 
Diﬀ erent Future: Conversations ’ , in  S. 
 Wynter (ed.),  On Being Human as Praxis , 
 Durham ,  NC :  Duke University Press . 
 XXXXX ( 2006 ),  Xxxxx ,  Berlin :  Mute 
Publishing . 
 Yaeger ,  P. ( 2010 ), ‘ Sea Trash, Dark Pools, and 
the Tragedy of the Commons ’ ,  PMLA , 
 125 ( 3 ):  523–45 . 
 Yetisen ,  A. K. ,  J.  Davis ,  A. F.  Coskun ,  G. M. 
 Church and  S. H.  Yun (2015), ‘ Bioart ’ , 
 Trends in Biotechnology ,  33 ( 12 ):  724–34 . 
 Yong ,  E. ( 2014 ), ‘ Th ere is No “Healthy” 
Microbiome ’,  New York Times ,  https://
www.nytimes.com/2014/11/02/opinion/
sunday/there- is-no- healthy-microbiome.
html?_r=01 November [accessed  15 
January 2015 ].
CUMULATIVE
Anthropocene Observatory , exhibited by John 
Palmesino and Ann-Soﬁ  Rönnskog – 
Territorial Agency, Armin Linke, and 
Anselm Franke, Haus der Kulturen der 
Welt, Berlin  2013–15 , and BAK basis voor 
actuele kunst Utrecht, 2015. 
 Asmat – Nomi ( 2014 ), dir. D. Yimer. 
 Black is . . . Black Ain’t ( 1994 ), dir. M. 
Riggs. [DVD]. California Newsreel.
 Blade Runner ( 1982 ), dir. R. Scott,  USA , 
Hong Kong,  UK : Th e Ladd Company, 
Warner Bros. et.al. 
 Cabin in the Woods ( 2012 ), dir. D. Goddard, 
 USA : Lionsgate, Netﬂ ix. 
 Dawn of the Dead  ( 1978 ), dir. G. A. Romero, 
 USA : United Film Distribution Co.,  DVD . 
 Elysium ( 2013 ), dir. N. Blomkamp,  USA : 
Tristar Pictures et.al. 
 Entropy Wrangler ( 2013 ), dir. I. Cheng. 
 Ex Machina ( 2015 ), dir. A. Garland. 
 Frogs ( 1972 ), dir. G. McCowan,  USA : 
American International Pictures,  DVD . 
 Jaws ( 1975 ), dir. S. Spielberg,  USA : Universal 
Pictures,  DVD . 
 Limulus , dir. K. Kramer, 2013. 
 Mad Max series:  Mad Max ( 1979 ), dir. G. 
Miller, Australia: Kennedy Miller 
Productions;  Mad Max 2: Th e Road 
Warrior ( 1981 ), dir. G. Miller, Australia: 
Kennedy Miller Productions;  Mad Max 
Beyond Th underdome ( 1985 ), dir. G. 
Miller and G. Ogilvie, Australia: Kennedy 
Miller Productions;  Mad Max: Fury Road 
( 2015 ), dir. G. Miller., Australia,  USA : 
Warner Bros. Pictures et.al. 
 Medium Earth , dir. Th e Otolith Group, Solo 
exhib i tion,  REDCAT Los Angeles, 2013. 
 Mega Shark vs. Giant Octopus ( 2009 ), dir. 
J. Perez (as Ace Hannah),  USA : Netﬂ ix. 
 Naked , dir. Tove Kjellmark, video install a tion 
2010,  https://vimeo.com/12251595 
[accessed 15 January 2015]. 
 Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ), dir. G. A. 
Romero,  USA : Image Ten. 
 Nothing Left  to Take Away ( 2011 ), A. Branch, 
 http://alexbranch.com/video/view/6638 
[accessed 15 January 2015]. 
 Ribbons  ( 2014 ), dir. E. Atkins, Serpentine 
Sackler Gallery, London, 11 June to 
25 August. 
 Shark Night 3D   ( 2011 ), dir. D. R. Ellis,  USA : 
Relativity Media, Netﬂ ix. 
 Sharknado ( 2013 ), dir. A. C. Ferrante,  USA : 
Th e Asylum,  DVD . 
 Sharktopus ( 2010 ), dir. D. O’Brien,  USA : 
Syfy,  DVD . 
 Th e Asylum ,  DVD . 
 Th e Birds ( 1963 ), dir. A. Hitchcock,  USA : 
Universal Pictures,  DVD . 
 Th e Blob ( 1958 ), dir. I. S. Yeaworth, Jr.,  USA : 
Paramount Pictures, Netﬂ ix. 
 Th e Day Aft er Tomorrow ( 2004 ), dir. R. 
Emmerich,  USA : Twentieth Century Fox 
Film Co. et.al. 
 Th e Day the Earth Stood Still ( 2008 ), dir. S. 
Derrickson,  USA , Canada: Twentieth 
Century Fox Film Co. et.al. 
 Th e Exorcist ( 1973 ), dir. W. Friedkin,  USA : 
Warner Bros, Netﬂ ix. 
 Th e Fly ( 1986 ), dir. D. Cronenberg,  USA : 
Twentieth Century Fox, Netﬂ ix. 
 Th e Forgotten Space ( 2010 ), dir. A. Sekula 
and N. Burch, Doc.Eye Film,   http://www.
thefor got ten space.net [accessed 4 April 
2017]. 
 Th e Last Angel of History ( 1996 ), dir. J. 
Akomfrah. 
 Th e Matrix   trilogy, dir. L.and L. Wachowski, 
 USA : Warner Bros. et.al. :  Th e Matrix 
( 1999 ),  Th e Matrix Reloaded ( 2003 ),  Th e 
Matrix Revolutions ( 2003 ) 
 Th em! ( 1954 ), dir. G. Douglas,  USA : Warner 
Bros.,  DVD . 
 Wall-E ( 2008 ), dir. A. Stanton,  USA : Pixar 
Animation Studios, Walt Disney 
Pictures. 
 Who Does the Earth Th ink It Is? dir. Th e 
Otolith Group, group exhib i tion, Th e 
Anthropocene Project. Haus der Kulturen 
der Welt, Berlin, 2014. 
 Willard ( 2003 ), dir. G. Morgan,  USA : New 
Line Cinema,  DVD . 
 World War Z ( 2013 ), dir. M. Forster,  USA : 
Paramount Pictures et.al.





